ID	Label	Text
4633	Evidential	"Through its vastness, resilience and biogeochemical complexity, the ocean offers humanity some of the largest potential natural pathways for removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere while avoiding new sources of anthropogenic emissions. In proposing a network of new marine protected areas in service of global ocean conservation, Sala et al. describe a potentially large climate benefit of such a strategy: a reduction or elimination in carbon emissions that can result from the resuspension and subsequent remineralization of organic matter in ocean sediments following benthic trawling and dredging. Sala et al. estimated that as much as 1.47 Pg CO2 yr-1 — equivalent to 4% of all global CO2 emissions in 2020 — could be produced globally in the first year disturbance associated with benthic trawling, with CO2 “emissions” from trawling activity declining after roughly a decade to 0.58 Pg CO2 yr-1.  However, using the published output from a series of experiments in an inverse ocean circulation model to account explicitly for the timescale of atmospheric ventilation, we show that the Sala et al. estimate of global CO2 efflux in the first year after trawling must be discounted by at least 33%, yielding an adjusted flux of 0.99 Pg CO2 yr-1, if one aims to ultimately estimate emissions to the atmosphere. Similarly, the cumulative CO2 emissions attributable under the Sala et al. model to a continuous pattern of global benthic trawling activity over a 30-year timescale must be discounted by at least 12% (compare 19.6 and 17.2 Pg CO2)."
4842	Definitive	"Proglacial lakes are becoming ubiquitous at the termini of many glaciers worldwide, leading to increased glacier mass loss and terminus retreat, yet an understanding of the key processes forcing their behaviour is lacking. This study utilised high-resolution repeat uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV)-Structure from Motion (SfM) imagery to provide insights into the changing dynamics of Fjallsj√∂kull, a large lake-terminating glacier in southeast Iceland, across the 2019 and 2021 summer melt seasons. We show that the overall dynamics of the glacier are controlled by the ~120 m deep bedrock channel under the study region, which has caused the glacier to flow faster as it enters deeper water, leading to increased ice acceleration, thinning and retreat, with the glacier decoupled from local climate as a result. The close correspondence between ice velocity and surface thinning suggests the implementation of the dynamic thinning feedback mechanism, with such a response likely to continue in future until the glacier recedes out of the bedrock channel into shallower water. As a result, these findings clearly indicate the complex nature of the calving process, highlighting the need for continued monitoring of lake-terminating glaciers in order to better understand and predict how they may respond in future."
3174	Evidential	"Cropland mapping in smallholder landscapes is challenged by complex and fragmented landscapes, labor-intensive and unmechanized land management causing high within-field variability, rapid dynamics in shifting cultivation systems, and substantial proportions of short-term fallows. To overcome these challenges, we here present a large-area mapping framework to identify active cropland and short-term fallows in smallholder landscapes for the 2020/2021 growing season at 4.77 m spatial resolution. Our study focuses on Northern Mozambique, an area comprising 381,698 km2. The approach is based on Google Earth Engine and time series of PlanetScope mosaics made openly available through Norwa_s International Climate and Forest Initiative (NICFI) data program. We conducted multi-temporal coregistration of the PlanetScope data using seasonal Sentinel-2 base images and derived consistent and gap-free seasonal time series metrics to classify active cropland and short-term fallows. An iterative active learning framework based on Random Forest class probabilities was used for training rare classes and uncertain regions. The map was accurate (area-adjusted overall accuracy 88.6% ± 1.5%), with the main error type being the commission of active cropland. Error-adjusted area estimates of active cropland extent (61,799.5 km2 ± 4,252.5 km2) revealed that existing global and regional land cover products tend to under-, or over-estimate active cropland extent, respectively. Short-term fallows occupied 28.9% of the cropland in our reference sample (13% of the mapped cropland), with consolidated agricultural regions showing the highest shares of short-term fallows. Our approach relies on openly available PlanetScope data and cloud-based processing in Google Earth Engine, which minimizes financial constraints and maximizes replicability of the methods. All code and maps were made available for further use."
1499	Hypothetical	"Instrumental climate records of the last centuries suffer from multiple breaks due to relocations and changes in measurement techniques. These breaks are detected by relative homogenization algorithms using the difference time series between a candidate and a reference. Modern multiple changepoint methods use a decomposition approach where the segmentation explaining most variance defines the breakpoints, while a stop criterion restricts the number of breaks. In this 10 study a pairwise multiple breakpoint algorithm consisting of these two components is tested with simulated data for a range of signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) found in monthly temperature station datasets. The results for low SNRs obtained by this algorithm do not differ much from random segmentations; simply increasing the stop criterion to reduce the number of breaks is shown to be not helpful. This can be understood by considering that in case of multiple breakpoints also a random segmentation explains about half of the break variance. We derive analytical equations for the explained noise and break 15 variance for random and optimal segmentations. From these we conclude that reliable break detection at low, but realistic SNRs needs a new approach. The problem is relevant because the uncertainty of station trends is shown to be climatologically significant also for these small SNRs. An important side-result is a new method to determine the break variance and the number of breaks in a difference time series by studying the explained variance for random break positions."
2148	Definitive	"Climate change is affecting many aspects of natural ecosystems and society. Anticipating the changes in vegetation resilience – the plants’ capacity to cope with disturbances and shocks such as those related to climate variability and extremes – is critical to understand and project ecosystems’ responses to global change and the impacts on the related ecosystem services, to support mitigation actions, and to define proper adaptation plans.  Here, we quantify vegetation gross primary production (GPP) resilience by computing the annual production resilience indicator from the state-of-the-art Earth System Model (ESM) simulations included in the newest Sixth Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6). Taking the present period (1985-2014) as reference, we estimate the GPP resilience changes for different periods in the near and far future (2021-2050 and 2051-2100) under three scenarios of socioeconomical global changes, corresponding to different levels of greenhouse gases’ emissions and land-use.  In the ‘Sustainability (Taking the Green Road)’ and ‘Middle of the Road’ scenarios considered here (ssp126 and ssp245), the areas where vegetation shows increasing GPP resilience (mainly boreal, African and Indian monsoonal regions) are wider than the areas with decreasing resilience. The situation drastically reverses in the ’Fossil-fuel Development (Taking the Highway)’ scenario (ssp585), mostly because the increase of GPP interannual variability outbalances the mean increase due to the CO2 fertilization effect in this high greenhouse gases’ emission scenario. Among the larger countries, Brazil is exposed to the highest risk of experiencing years with anomalously low GPP, especially in the ’Taking the Highway’ scenario."
1431	Exploratory	"Paleoslope of ancient river systems is a fundamental parameter needed to reconstruct paleohydrology and paleoclimate from the fluvial sedimentary record. The shape of braid bars in 22 modern rivers yields a relationship between average bar elongation (length/width) and river slope. Steep rivers display more elongated bars than gently dipping reaches. This relationship has potential application to ancient braided systems preserved in the subsurface and imaged by 3D seismic data. The average elongation of bars identified on a stratal-slice through the DaGang river deposits in North-East China yields a slope prediction which, combined with empirical data on grain size and slope of alluvial rivers, predicts a median grain size of between 0.1 and 1 mm for the considered river sediment, in agreement with grain size data in an adjacent isochronous belt. This study provides an additional approach for paleohydraulics in sedimentary basins and grain size prediction in exploration."
3034	Definitive	"Hydroclimatic extremes, such as heavy daily rainfall and dry spells, are expected to intensify under anthropogenic warming. Often, these changes are diagnostically related to thermodynamic increases in humidity with warming. Here, we develop a framework that uses an on-line calculation of the thermodynamically induced changes of the full precipitation distribution with warming in an idealized moist atmospheric general circulation model. Two water vapor variables, the standard active one and an additional passive one (i.e., no latent heat release when condensation occurs), are advected by the resolved circulation. The passive water vapor is thermodynamically perturbed by modifying the saturation specific humidity used in the calculation of its condensation tendency and surface evaporation. The difference between the precipitation of the perturbed passive water vapor relative to the control one corresponds to the thermodynamic component of precipitation change, which can be evaluated for the entire distribution. Here, we evaluate wet and dry extremes. Our simulations have tropical increases and higher latitude decrease of dry spells' length (defined as the maximum consecutive dry days), as found in the zonal-mean of comprehensive models. This simulated thermodynamically induced intensification of dry spells in the tropics arises from the decreased contrast between sea surface temperature and surface air temperature with warming. The simulated increase in heavy daily rainfall (e.g., the 99.9th percentile of the daily precipitation distribution) at all latitudes differs modestly from a previous theory that assumes moist adiabatic stratification and increased warming aloft slightly damps the simulated increase, as the theory suggests."
3185	Definitive	"Riverbank erosion coupled with recurrent flooding has been a persistent problem in large parts of the Eastern India. Published data on bank erosion of the Ganga River in West Bengal suggests an annual average of 8 sq. km. land-loss during 1969-1999 and that potentially affected lives of nearly a million people and destroyed various human establishments. In this study, we aim to constrain the spatiotemporal change in the path of the Ganga River and its impact of on sediment reworking in the plains area. For this, we used LANDSAT imagery from the year 1987 to 2019.  Our analysis is based on a MATLAB-based toolbox called RivMAP. We show that the mean reach-averaged migration rates of the Ganga River vary from 200-600m/yr. Over the last three decades, the Malda district suffered a land-loss of ~140 km2, yielding an average annual loss of 4.5 km2. First order mass estimate suggests ~30 Mt/yr sediment yield from the Ganga riverbank in Malda, which is ~8ÔÄ≠15% of the total annual sediment load of the large Ganga River expected in Farakka Barrage. In the end, this study highlights the role of climate on river migration and bank erosion."
8128	Evidential	"Organism-level bioenergetics models (OBMs) are an emerging tool for predicting consequences of climate change on organism growth in ecological systems. Global changes in ocean and atmospheric temperature may affect organisms that experience both environments, such as those living in intertidal systems. The acorn barnacle, Balanus glandula, is prevalent throughout the intertidal zone in the Eastern Pacific, and laboratory experiments demonstrate that feeding rates and metabolic costs are sensitive to temperature. We ask, based on these thermal responses, do aerial and aquatic warming decrease B. glandula growth in a field environment because of increased costs and reduced feeding? We measure environmental conditions (aerial and aquatic temperature) at three intertidal heights over two 6-month intervals and compare growth estimates based on an OBM to observed growth. Initial work indicates that growth is less sensitive to elevation than predicted by lab-based physiological rates alone, so we estimate an elevation-dependent compensation factor (Z) when fitting the model to all three elevations and the two intervals. This full model predicts that, in this environment, aquatic warming will counteract increased costs of aerial warming, by virtue of increased feeding at warmer temperatures. This work advances OBMs by combining the effects of multiple decoupled thermal responses (e.g. feeding, respiration) in multiple contexts (aerial, aquatic), drawing on established model selection and “divide and conquer” techniques, and identifying sources of uncertainty in the model. This work indicates that future intertidal OBMs may benefit from an improved characterization of feeding behavior, including empirical estimates of elevation-dependent feeding compensation."
6325	Evidential	"The Rodderberg Volcanic Complex (RVC) is well-known for the long and probably continuous climate record archived in its crater basin, which lasts for several glacial-interglacial cycles. However, a detailed chronological framework is still lacking. Here, we perform high-resolution luminescence dating on a 72.8 m-long sediment core with the optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) signal from fine-grained (4‚Äì11 ¬µm) quartz and three kinds of post-infrared infrared (pIRIR) stimulated luminescence signals from fine-grained polymineral fractions. Quartz OSL ages align well with pIRIR ages for the last 50 ka, but they underestimate in relation to pIRIR ages for ages beyond 50 ka. The three pIRIR signals, including the pIRIR signal at 225 ¬∞C (pIRIR225), the pulsed pIRIR signal at 150 ¬∞C (pulsed pIRIR150) and the multi-elevated-temperature pIRIR at 250 ¬∞C (MET-pIRIR250), yield consistent ages up to ca. 250 ka at a sediment depth of 37.5 m. Below that depth, dating limits of the protocols are exceeded. Nevertheless, our results indicate that sediments below 37.5 m predate Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 7. Altogether, obtained ages reveal continuous dust accumulation during MIS 7 and MIS 6. One erosional event happened at the end of the Eemian (MIS 5e), which eroded the Eemian soil. The sedimentation rate during the Weichselian glacial period is tenfold lower compared to the sedimentation rate observed during MIS 7‚Äì6. This low sedimentation rate likely arises from the cessation of slope-wash effects and the occurrence of various erosional events alternating with dust deposition. A notably high sedimentation rate is observed at the transition from MIS 6 to Eemian, marked by the deposition of a 6 m-thick loess layer between 132 and 129 ka. This high sedimentation rate could be attributed to intensified slope-wash and solifluction processes resulting from the thawing of permafrost.  Alternatively, it might be a signature of an abrupt cold pulse such as Heinrich event 11."
6676	Hypothetical	"North Atlantic hurricanes are a major driver of property losses in the United States and a critical peril for the reinsurance industry globally. We leverage insurance loss data and stochastic modeling to investigate the impacts of projected changes in hurricane climatology on the insurance industry, for +2 °C and +4 °C warming scenarios. We find that, relative to the historical baseline 1950-2022, expected changes in wind speed and rainfall may increase hurricane losses by 5% _15% (+2 °C) and 10% _ 30% (+4 °C), with greater impacts at lower return periods than in the tail. The historical 100-year loss event may therefore be exceeded on average every 80 years (+2 °C) and 70 years (+4 °C). The expected changes in average annual loss are projected to be 10% (+2 °C) and 15% (+4 °C), with the largest relative increase attributable to precipitation-induced losses. Under the extreme SSP5-8.5 scenario, the expected loss inflation due to climate change is thus on the order of 0.5% per annum."
8573	Definitive	"Understanding the mortality effects of the most extreme heat events is central to climate change risk analysis and adaptation decision-making. Accurate representation of these impacts requires accounting for the effects of prolonged sequences of hot days on mortality, the change in that mortality due to anthropogenic forcing, and the potential compensating effects of adaptation to heat. Here, we revisit the August 2003 heat wave in France, a canonical event in a region with rich climate and mortality data, to understand these influences. We find that standard heat mortality exposure-response functions underpredict excess deaths in August 2003 by 60%, but that accounting for the temporally compounding effects of hot days better matches observed mortality. After accounting for compounding effects and applying a machine learning approach to single-event climate attribution, we attribute 6,038 deaths in August 2003 to climate change, ten times higher than previous estimates. Finally, we show that recent adaptation to heat has reduced the projected death tolls of future 2003-like events by more than 80%."
1437	Evidential	"Monitoring global land cover changes is important because of concerns about their impact on environment and climate. The release by the European Space Agency (ESA) of a set of worldwide annual land cover maps covering the 1992‚Äì2015 period makes possible a quantitative assessment of land change on the global scale. While ESA land cover mapping effort was motivated by the need to better characterize global and regional carbon cycles, the dataset may benefit a broad range of disciplines. To facilitate utilization of ESA maps for broad-scale problems in landscape ecology and environmental studies, we have constructed a GIS-based vector database of mesoscale landscapes ‚Äì patterns of land cover categories in 9km √ó 9km tracts of land. First, we reprojected ESA maps to the Fuller projection to assure that each landscape in the database has approximately the same size and shape so the patterns of landscapes at different locations can be compared.  Second, we calculated landscape attributes including its compositions in 1992 and 2015, magnitude of pattern change, categories transition matrix for detailed characterization of change, fractional abundances of plant functional types (PFTs) in 1992 and 2015, and change trend type ‚Äì a simple, overall descriptor of the character of landscape change. Combining change trends and change magnitude information we constructed a global, thematic map of land change; this map offers a visualization of what, where, and to what degree has changed between 1992 and 2015. The database is SQL searchable and supports all GIS vector operations.  Using change magnitude attribute we calculated that only 22% of total landmass experienced significant landscape change during the 1992-2015 period, but that change zone accounted for 80% of all pixel-based transitions. Dominant land cover transitions were forest ‚Üí agriculture followed by agriculture ‚Üí forest. Using PFTs attributes to calculate global aggregation of gross and net changes for major PFTs yielded results in agreement with other recent estimates."
5139	Hypothetical	"Smallholder agriculture has historically dominated Ethiopia's agricultural production. To boost crop output and productivity, agrochemicals and agricultural equipment have proven indispensable. However, climatic information has received minimal consideration from agricultural interventions in food production and health development programmes. The heterogeneous qualities of smallholder farmers were likewise ignored by conventional agricultural extension services. The objective of this study is to assess the susceptibility of different groups of smallholders in the moist stress zones of Boricha and Bilate Zuria Woreda, Sidama National Regional State, to food and health risks associated with climate variability. To acquire data, a qualitative research design employing focus group discussions and interviews with key informants was utilised. The data indicate that climate variability affects the vulnerability of smallholder farmers differently. Climate information on spring rainfall (January to April) becomes a window period affecting food and nutrition and the health state of smallholder farmer categories. Rich and middle-class farmers were better able to obtain climate information from radio and television than the poor and women smallholders in order to lessen their climate susceptibility. In addition, the data indicate that women and the poor were disadvantaged in their ability to participate in communities where climate-related knowledge was shared due to their lack of economic resources and cultural factors. In the study areas, women and the impoverished are predisposed to health epidemics due to climate change, including scabies, marasmus, kawashiorkor, typhoid, typhus, and malaria. Establishing pro-poor and gender-responsive delivery of climate information services at the home level should be incorporated into agricultural and health extension programmes to improve food, nutrition, and health in moisture-stressed rural communities."
5101	Evidential	"Glacier models contribute significantly to the uncertainty of glacier change projections. In this study, we focus on temperature-index mass-balance (MB) models and their calibration, exploring the impact of various design choices on projections. Using the Open Global Glacier Model (OGGM), we compare the effects of different surface-type dependent degree-day factors, temporal climate resolutions (daily, monthly) and downscaling strategies (temperature lapse rates, temperature and precipitation correction) on projections for 88 glaciers with in-situ observations. Our analysis shows that higher spatial and temporal resolution MB observations lead to more accurate MB gradient representations thanks to an improved calibration. Some choices have systematic effects. For example, weaker temperature lapse rates result in smaller glaciers in a warmer climate. However, we often find nonlinear effects, such as with the sensitivity to different degree-day factors for snow, firn, and ice, which depends on how the glacier accumulation area ratio changes in the future. Similarly, using daily versus monthly climate data can have opposite effects on different glaciers. Our study highlights the importance of considering minor model design differences to predict future glacier volumes and runoff accurately. However, the lack of independent observations limits our ability to evaluate the added value of additional model complexity."
2447	Evidential	"Climate models are essential tools for investigating intrinsic North Atlantic variability related to variations in the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC), but recent observations have called into question the fidelity of models that emphasize the importance of Labrador Sea processes. A multi-century pre-industrial climate simulation that resolves ocean mesoscale eddies has a realistic representation of key observed subpolar Atlantic phenomena, including the dominance of density-space overturning in the eastern subpolar gyre, and thus provides uniquely credible context for interpreting short observational records. Despite weak mean surface diapycnal transformation in the Labrador Sea, multidecadal AMOC variability can be traced to anomalous production of dense Labrador Sea Water with local buoyancy forcing in the interior Labrador Sea playing a significant driving role."
5647	Evidential	"In high-mountain landscapes, biological resources such as organic carbon (OC) are often limited and heterogeneously stored in poorly developed soils, snow, ground ice and glaciers. Climate change influences the dynamics of OC mobilization to- and processing into- the recipient streams. These patterns can vary from seasonal (e.g., snow melt in spring) to daily (e.g., ice melt in summer) depending on the location of the streams within the catchment. Capturing the temporal richness of stream biogeochemical signals is now a reality with the advent of high-resolution sensors. In this study, we used wavelet analysis on high-frequency discharge (Q) and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) measurements from nine streams in the Swiss Alps to investigate whether synchrony (S) of Q (SQ) and DOC (SDOC) persisted or collapsed among streams, and its response to the spatial position, climate, and land cover gradients across different time scales. Our findings reveal that short-term (0-10 days) SQ and SDOC were strongly influenced by distance between streams and network connectivity. In contrast, catchment-related properties (i.e., altitude or land cover) were more important in driving SQ and SDOC dynamics at longer time scales (>50 days). However, the degree to which local catchment properties controlled S patterns at the longest timescales depended both on the response variable (i.e., Q vs. DOC) as well on the main land cover (i.e., vegetation vs. glacier). Elucidating the most prominent timescales of SDOC is relevant given the hydrological alterations projected for high-mountain regions. We show that glaciers impose a unique seasonal regime on DOC concentration, potentially overriding the effects of other local hydrological or biogeochemical processes during downstream transport. Consequently, SDOC dynamics in high-mountain streams may change as glaciers shrink, thereby altering downstream opportunities for biogeochemical transformations."
6767	Exploratory	"Weather and climate modeling, reliant on substantial computational resources, faces challenges of escalating resource demands and energy consumption as problem sizes and model complexity increase. Leveraging Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) for accelerated simulations demands performance portability across diverse High Performance Computing (HPC) architectures. The concept of embedded Domain Specific Language (eDSL) emerges as a lightweight solution, aiming to streamline GPU utilization without extensive code rewrites and to enhance code portability across HPC architectures. This study explores the practical implementation of an eDSL within the Icosahedral Nonhydrostatic (ICON) weather and climate model, primarily written in Fortran. Our evaluation contrasts eDSL utilization within ICON against other Earth system models, with particular emphasis on three-dimensional mass transport, or advection. Through assessing the eDSL's efficectiveness in various models, especially its application in the ParFlow and EULAG models, insights into its potential for ICON emerge. While the eDSL presents a promising avenue for performance portability, challenges in adapting Fortran-based codes, GPU support, and resource allocation underscore the need for necessity for thorough planning and resource allocation in model development endeavors. Overall, the eDSL offers a viable pathway for harnessing GPU acceleration while mitigating the complexities of code portability across diverse HPC architectures, essential for advancing weather and climate modeling capabilities."
1255	Exploratory	"It is shown that the large-scale climate dynamics, represented by the daily indices of the North Atlantic (NAO), Pacific/North American (PNA), Arctic (AO) and Antarctic (AAO) oscillations, Asian-Australian Monsoons (ISM, WNPM and AUSM) and El Nino/La Nina phenomenon (Nino indices) as well as global temperature anomalies (land), is dominated by the Hamiltonian distributed chaos with the stretched exponential spectrum. The predictability problem (predictability horizon properties) has been also discussed in this context."
7095	Exploratory	"In recent years, the scientific community focused on snow dynamics has witnessed a surge in efforts aimed at enhancing Snow Water Equivalent (SWE) monitoring capabilities, largely propelled by the incorporation of Machine Learning (ML) techniques. This comprehensive review delves into the current state of research within this evolving domain, shedding light on the indispensable role of precise SWE predictions in bolstering water resource management strategies and fostering environmental resilience amidst the backdrop of climate variability. By critically examining existing literature, this review underscores the imperative nature of ML-based methodologies in overcoming the inherent limitations of traditional monitoring paradigms. Highlighting the adaptability and promise of various ML algorithms, this paper serves as a cornerstone resource for researchers, practitioners, and policymakers dedicated to advancing SWE estimation practices and, consequently, promoting sustainable water resource management in snow-dominated regions."
6863	Exploratory	"Climate change triggers a wide range of hydrometeorological, glaciological and geophysical processes that span across vast spatiotemporal scales. With the advances in technology and analytics, a multitude of remote sensing, geodetic and in situ instruments have been developed to effectively monitor and help comprehend the Earth's system including its climate variability and the recent anomalies associated with global warming. A huge volume of data is generated by recording these observations, resulting in the need for novel methods to handle and interpret such Big Datasets. Managing this enormous amount of data extends beyond current computer storage considerations; it also encompasses the complexities of processing, modeling, and analysing. Big Datasets present unique characteristics that set them apart from smaller datasets, thereby posing challenges to traditional approaches. Moreover, computational time plays a crucial role, especially in the context of geohazard warning and response systems which   necessitate low latency requirements. In this review, we delve into the monitoring and analysis of various climate change-related phenomena, including, but not limited to, droughts, floods, cyclones-induced storm surges, urban heat islands, ice mass balance, sea-level rise, and the modelling of the influence of solar variability on the Earth’s climate. By examining these phenomena, we explore some of the current and future trends in Big Data, aiming to encourage and speed-up the development of such techniques and promoting their benefits to timely monitor and towards achieving climate sustainability, thereby addressing its threat to humanity."
6075	Evidential	"Developed barrier systems (barrier islands and spits) are lowering and narrowing with sea-level rise (SLR) such that habitation will eventually become infeasible or prohibitively expensive in its current form. Before reaching this state, communities and other entities will make choices, in the face of changing climate conditions, to modify the natural and built environment to reduce relatively short-term risk. These choices will likely vary substantially even along the same developed barrier system as these landscapes are rarely uniformly managed alongshore. Building on the results from a companion paper, here we use a new modeling framework to investigate the complexities in barrier system dynamics that emerge as a function of alongshore variability in management strategies, accelerations in SLR, and changes in storm intensity and frequency. Model results suggest that when connected through alongshore sediment transport, barriers with alongshore variable management strategies ‚Äì here, the construction of dunes and wide beaches to protect either roadways or communities ‚Äì evolve differently than they would in the absence of alongshore connections. Shoreline stabilization by communities in one location influences neighboring areas managed solely for roadways, inducing long-term system-wide lags in shoreline retreat, even decades after nourishment ceases. Conversely, when barrier segments managed for roadways are allowed to overwash, this induces shoreline curvature system-wide, thus enhancing erosion on nearby stabilized segments. Feedbacks between dunes, storms, overwash flux, and alongshore sediment transport also affect the long-term outcome of climate adaptation measures. In the case of partial, early abandonment of roadway management (i.e., decades before the road is deemed untenable), we find that system-wide transitions to less vulnerable landscape states are possible, even under accelerated SLR and increased storminess."
4573	Hypothetical	"To quantitatively understand the ecological resilience of an ecosystem with specialized habitats, we focused on deep-sea microbial communities and simulated the response of diverse microbes in specialized habitats to a pulse ecosystem disturbance - the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Two microbial communities with equivalent metabolic libraries were acclimated to the presence (‚Äúseep-adapted community‚Äù) or absence (‚Äúna√Øve community‚Äù) of natural seeps, then their metabolic and ecological responses following the disturbance were compared on both individual and community scales. Higher variability in functional metabolisms in the na√Øve community without selection pressure created less predictable response to the disturbance. Although spatially and temporally varying degradation rates resulted from the individual complexity of simulated degraders and their interactions with overall community, seep-adapted communities were more efficient in utilizing substrate when spatially averaged. Seep-adapted communities also had more heterogeneous diversity patterns across space and time and presented lower resistance and higher resilience in returning to baseline conditions following the disturbance. The model suggests that communities exposed to transient pulse disturbance or exchanging species with specialized habitats under selection for the disturbance may have greater sustainability in response to disturbance."
7398	Evidential	"Accurate estimates of carbon recycling efficiency at subduction zones are crucial for understanding the long-term evolution of the planet’s climate. Estimating subducting carbon recycling efficiency is difficult, however, due to magmatic degassing deep within the crust. Stable strontium (_88Sr) isotopes have the potential to serve as an additional proxy for carbonate recycling due to carbonate’s high Sr concentrations and unique _88Sr composition. New data from Nicaraguan lavas and sediments verify that Sr can indeed be used to track subducting carbon. When interpreted in conjunction with other magmatic trace element abundances, these data reveal systematic variations that are best understood as the effects of seamount subduction. Seamounts erupting at the same time carbonate-dominated sedimentation ceased on the Cocos plate could potentially ‘cap’ the carbonate layer and control the degree to which carbonate material is transported to the arc. This model can also be used to quantify the flux of carbonate sediment from the slab to the arc and thus provides an independent method to estimate the magmatic carbon recycling efficiency for the Nicaraguan Arc. Our model shows, absent seamounts, 26% to 52% of carbon from subducted carbonate is returned to the arc, an estimate consistent with recent estimates made from volcanic gases."
2521	Exploratory	"We conduct extended versions of the ISMIP6 future climate experiments for the Greenland ice sheet until the year 3000 with the model SICOPOLIS. Beyond 2100, the climate forcing is kept fixed at late-21st-century conditions. For the unabated warming pathway RCP8.5/SSP5-8.5, the ice sheet suffers a severe mass loss, which amounts to ~ 1.8 m SLE (sea-level equivalent) for the twelve-experiment mean, and ~ 3.5 m SLE (~ 50% of the entire mass) for the most sensitive experiment. For the reduced emissions pathway RCP2.6/SSP1-2.6, the mass loss is limited to a two-experiment mean of ~ 0.28 m SLE. Climate-change mitigation during the next decades will therefore be an efficient means for limiting the contribution of the Greenland ice sheet to sea-level rise in the long term."
6686	Evidential	"Quantifying Quaternary sea-level changes and hydroclimatic conditions is an important challenge given their intricate relation with paleo-climate, ice-sheets and geodynamics. The world’s coastlines provide an enormous geomorphologic archive, from which forward landscape evolution modelling studies have shown their potential to unravel paleo sea-levels, albeit at the cost of assumptions to the genesis of these landforms. We take a next step, by applying a Bayesian approach to jointly invert the geometries of multiple coastal terrace sequences to paleo sea- and lake level variations and extract past hydroclimatic conditions. Using a Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling method, we first test our approach on synthetic marine terrace profiles as proof of concept and benchmark our model on an observed marine terrace sequence in Santa Cruz (US). We successfully reproduce observed sequence morphologies and simultaneously obtain probabilistic estimates for past sea-level variations, as well as for other model parameters such as uplift and erosion rates. When applied to the semi-isolated Gulf of Corinth (Greece), our method allows deciphering the geomorphic Rosetta stone at an unprecedented resolution, revealing the connectivity between the Lake/Gulf of Corinth and the open sea for different hydroclimatic conditions. Eustatic sea-level and changing sill depths drive marine and transitional phases during interglacial and interstadial periods, whereas wetter and drier hydroclimates respectively over- and under-fill Lake Corinth during interstadial and glacial periods."
7163	Definitive	"With rapid urbanization and the increasing threats of climate change, metropolitan cities like Karachi, Pakistan, are encountering greater challenges due to the Urban Heat Island (UHI) phenomenon. Understanding the cooling potential of urban green spaces (UGS) is crucial for mitigating heat stress and enhancing urban resilience. This study aims to analyze the thermal dynamics and cooling efficacy of UGS within Karachi's dense urban centre through a comprehensive analysis of UHI intensity and the delineation of thermal hot and cool spots in relation to the city's landscape. The analysis reveals a strong positive correlation between the cooling intensity of parks and their buffer distance in all four UGS studied (Karachi golf club, Clifton urban forest, UoK green space, and Safari park), with an average cooling distance of 250 meters. It was found that Karachi West and Malir districts displayed the strongest UHI effects and higher levels of thermal discomfort. Hotspot analysis further confirmed this relationship, revealing a prevalence of cold spots near coastal areas and hotspots in districts lacking green spaces. The study highlights the significance of giving priority to the development and preservation of green spaces, especially in identified hotspots, to enhance the livability of Karachi and create a cooler environment."
7036	Evidential	"This paper takes a multi-perspective approach to understand drivers and barriers of climate action on the neighbourhood level in a selection of European neighbourhoods. The starting point for the analysis is the assumption that actions on the level of citizens to protect the climate are most motivating and promising, when conducted jointly within established social systems like neighbourhoods. The aim of this paper therefore is to identify most relevant factors that are associated with climate actions of individuals on the neighbourhood level. To do so, the paper outlines the multiple perspectives chosen for the analysis of drivers and barriers on the individual, collective, cultural, and socio-structural level. Based on this, a survey was designed to measure these aspects and implemented in nine European neighbourhoods (3 in Austria, 2 in Norway, 2 in Italy, 2 in Finland). The neighbourhoods were partly in rural communities (4) and partly in urban or semi-urban areas (5). In total, 1.084 answers were retained between summer 2022 and summer 2023. The impact of factors from the different perspectives on the self-reported number of implemented climate actions were tested in a structured, regression-based approach. The analyses show that intentions to act both on the individual and collective level impact the number of climate actions implemented by citizens living in the neighbourhood, but individual intentions are more important. In addition, local cultural aspects have an impact on climate action. Individual intentions to act are slightly less important in rural, than in semi/urban neighbourhoods. On the socio-structural level, males and households with younger children report fewer climate actions, whereas larger households in general and people with university degree report more. Intentions to act individually are mostly determined by perceived individual efficacy and attitudes, but also selected cultural and socio-structural factors. Collective intentions to act depend on the social capital in the neighbourhood and social norms, as well as selected socio-structural and cultural factors. Concluding, this paper emphasises that in order to understand, implement (and increase) the climate-related actions of citizens efficient, the individual, collective, cultural and socio-structural factors must be taken into account and that the level of neighbourhoods, where everyday action takes place, is a relevant unit of analysis to do so."
5379	Hypothetical	"Climate change is one of the biggest threats to public health in the 21st century. To date little action has been undertaken globally to mitigate the risks of climate change. The aim of this systematic review is to synthesise the qualitative literature on people’s and the health care systems’ lived experiences of climate change with a focus on health and health inequalities. We employed a narrative synthesis approach utilising a chronological perspective to frame the results. Seven electronic databases were searched for eligible studies which included Academic Search Ultimate; CINAHL; Embase; MEDLINE; PsycINFO; PubMed; Scopus; and Web of Science. The primary outcomes were lived experiences of the health/health inequalities effects of climate change. We identified 473 original records and eight papers met the inclusion criteria. Study quality was assessed by the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme for qualitative research. Seven studies focused on extreme weather events related to climate change with six of these looking at flooding and one at heat waves. One study examined perceptions and practice of people working in public health to adapting to climate change. Overall the results show challenges with perceiving and identifying risks of climate change which impact on preparedness for extreme weather events. The social determinants of health such as gender, housing, and community cohesion impact on people’s experience of climate change potentially exacerbating inequalities. Social capital and how widespread the extreme weather event was in the community impact on how people feel after the event and the rebuilding process. Trust in local government was also a key factor in shaping people’s perception of recovery. These findings can be used to help frame the dialogue around climate change mitigation and adaption to reduce the negative health and health inequality impacts."
6690	Evidential	"Agricultural technology adoption is a critical driver of sustainable development, particularly in developing regions where agriculture plays a pivotal role in food security and livelihoods. This study combines network analysis, including causal loop diagrams (CLD), with centrality metrics, to uncover key leverage points within the system where targeted interventions can yield significant impacts on climate smart agricultural (CSA) technology adoption. Our findings reveal the intricate interconnections among various determinants, emphasizing the non-linear nature of technology adoption processes. The degree of centrality analysis identifies influential determinants within the network, offering insights into their potential impact and importance in driving change within the broader system. This research offers valuable guidance for policymakers, agricultural extension services, and development practitioners involved in CSA. It contributes to the efficient adoption and implementation of relevant technologies, thereby enhancing the resilience of agricultural practices in the face of climate change. Furthermore, it underscores the importance of considering the holistic context and intricate interactions to promote sustainable agricultural development in developing regions."
5203	Exploratory	"In the last few decades, Geology courses, particularly in the Global North have seen a decline in student enrolment.  Geologists have linked this downturn to a lack of exposure to the subject at school and college level. This work seeks to understand the public‚Äôs relationship with Geology and draws on over 5000 open-ended question responses to a survey disseminated in 2021. The survey asked both those who had, and had not, studied geology as a subject a series of questions in order to explore their perceptions of the discipline. Our findings indicate that individuals ‚Äòoutside‚Äô of geology see the subject as old fashioned, boring, and environmentally damaging; simply the study of rock samples with nothing new to be discovered from; and with poor job prospects outside of the oil and gas industry. Geologists who responded to the survey paint a picture of a broad, interdisciplinary subject, with vibrant employability opportunities ‚Äì yet struggle to coherently and collectively describe this when asked, ‚Äòwhat is geology?‚Äô. In addition to the identified perception of geology as boring, and notions of poor employability being a barrier to prospective students, diversity and inclusivity issues are highlighted as significant barriers by those who study geology. Our findings indicate that both geologists and the geology curriculum need to coherently describe what geology is more effectively. We need to develop and better communicate the subject's interdisciplinary nature and links to critical societal issues, such as the role of responsible mineral extraction in the energy transition and the importance of geology in vital areas such as climate change science, water resource management, environmental conservation, and sustainable urban/built development.  Finding new ways to show that, far from being boring, geology is a subject that can fundamentally change the way you see and interact with the world around you is of central importance to achieving this. Efforts to make the subject more equitable are also highlighted as being critical in creating a more inclusive and accessible discipline."
3015	Definitive	"In the current Matters Arising we present results from verifying control measurements of dissolved mercury (Hg) in glacial meltwater from the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS), which significantly challenges the conclusions of the recent publication by Hawkings et al. (2021). By direct measurements of meltwater in the same glacial catchment area, we demonstrate that the input Hg concentration for the regional upscaling in Hawkings et al (2021) is likely vastly over-estimated with major implications for the validity of the asserted extreme yield of Hg from the GrIS. In addition, we present a plausible explanation for the high Hg concentration values in the study, namely hitherto unidentified cross-contamination of water samples by mercury chloride (HgCl2), which was present and used for other purposes during field work. Together, the result of our control study potentially invalidates the suggested implications of geologically sourced Hg under the southwestern margin of the GrIS on the Arctic ecosystem in both current and future climate conditions."
5615	Exploratory	"Natural hazards pose significant risks to human lives, infrastructure, and ecosystems, necessitating a comprehensive understanding of climate risks for effective adaptation planning and risk management. However, climate risk assessments mostly focus on economic asset values and infrastructures such as roads and buildings, because publicly available data on more diverse exposures are scarce. The increasing availability of crowd-sourced geospatial data, notably from OpenStreetMap, opens up a novel means for assessing climate risk to a large range of physical assets. To this end, we present a stand-alone, lightweight, and highly flexible Python-based OpenStreetMap data extraction tool: OSM-flex. We demonstrate the potential and limitations of OpenStreetMap data for risk assessments by coupling OSM-flex to the open-source natural hazard risk assessment platform CLIMADA, and computing the current climate's winter storm risk and event impacts from the severe winter storm Lothar across Switzerland. Specifically, we evaluate the risks and impacts on forests, UNESCO heritage sites, railways, healthcare facilities, and airports, and compare them with traditional impact metrics such as asset damages and affected population. This study aims to provide researchers, practitioners, and decision-makers with insights into utilizing open-source data and software tools for conducting multi-faceted and high-resolution climate risk assessments."
8049	Hypothetical	"Recent ice cores from the Allan Hills, a blue ice area in Antarctica, are nearly 3 million years old. These cores extend ice core chronologies, enabling new insight into key climate periods such as the Mid-Pleistocene Transition. The interpretation of these climate records is complex because of the disturbed stratigraphy in this ice. Here we present a new three- dimensional multitrack electrical conductivity measurement method (3D ECM) to resolve layer structure. We demonstrate this technique on a cumulative 60 m of two large-diameter (241 mm) ice cores, ALHIC2201 and ALHIC2302. We find well defined and dipping layering in both cores, averaging 28° and 68° from horizontal, respectively. Both cores show a statistically significant but gradual decrease in dip angle with depth. We discuss how this new method can be applied to enable accurate, high- resolution multi-proxy record development even in ice cores with steeply dipping layers. 3D ECM improves interpretation of blue ice area cores by providing accurate, non-destructive constraints on stratigraphy."
5847	Exploratory	"The ice-albedo feedback associated with sea ice loss contributes to polar amplification, while the water vapor feedback contributes to tropical amplification of surface warming. However, these feedbacks are not independent of atmospheric energy transport, raising the possibility of complex interactions that may obscure the drivers of polar amplification, in particular its manifestation across the seasonal cycle. Here, we apply a radiative transfer hierarchy to the idealized Isca climate model coupled to a thermodynamic sea ice model. The climate responses and radiative feedbacks are decomposed into the contributions from sea ice loss, including both retreat and thinning, and the radiative effect of water vapor changes. We find that summer sea ice retreat causes winter polar amplification through ocean heat uptake and release, and the resulting decrease in dry energy transport weakens the magnitude of warming. Moreover, sea ice thinning is found to suppress summer warming and enhance winter warming, additionally contributing to winter amplification. The water vapor radiative effect produces seasonally symmetric polar warming via offsetting effects: enhanced moisture in the summer hemisphere induces the summer water vapor feedback and simultaneously strengthens the winter latent energy transport in the winter hemisphere by increasing the meridional moisture gradient. These results reveal the importance of changes in atmospheric energy transport induced by sea ice retreat and increased water vapor to seasonal polar amplification, elucidating the interactions among these physical processes."
6520	Hypothetical	"Human civilization will not collapse from the direct effects of climate change, but rather from the secondary effects of crop failures, infectious diseases, and armed conflict. The root cause of the climate crisis is the Earth’s energy imbalance: more energy is arriving at the Earth from the sun than is being radiated back out into space. This is occurring because we have been cutting down forests and burning fossil fuels for the last 150 years at a furious rate, leading to a greenhouse effect and the consequent warming of the Earth’s land, oceans, and atmosphere. There is now general agreement that continuing to burn fossil fuels will lead to catastrophic consequences for human civilization as well as thousands of other species. We know how to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and transition to other sources of power, but we are not doing this at a rate that will prevent catastrophe. The problems at this point are not scientific or technical but rather political, which is why individuals should focus on changing policies at the national and international level rather than focusing on reducing their individual carbon footprints. For meaningful change to occur there needs to be mass mobilizations for climate action, and one critical initial prerequisite is an honest assessment of the current situation, plus predictions about what we can realistically expect in the near future. The goal here is to provide that information."
2433	Evidential	"The early Eocene hothouse experienced the occurrence of transient global warming events, so-called hyperthermals. The deep ocean constitutes a stable and vast heat reservoir, and hence arguably provides a good estimate of the global mean climate state. However, available proxy deep-sea temperature reconstructions rely on uncertain assumptions of non-thermal influences associated with seawater chemistry and species-specific effects. Here, we apply carbonate clumped isotope thermometry on benthic foraminifera to evaluate South Atlantic deep-sea temperatures across two early Eocene hyperthermal events. Our reconstructions indicate deep-sea temperatures of 13.5±1.8 °C (95% CI) for the background state, and average hyperthermal peak temperatures of 16.9±2.2 °C (95% CI). Absolute temperatures are approximately three degrees warmer than estimates from benthic oxygen isotopes. These findings imply a necessary reassessment of the isotope composition of ocean water during the Eocene, of deep-sea pH in hothouse climates, and of a potential pH effect on benthic foraminiferal oxygen isotope records."
1210	Evidential	"Region of influence is a common approach to estimate runoff information at ungauged locations. To estimate flood quantiles from annual maximum discharges, the Generalized Least Squares (GLS) framework has been recommended to account for unequal sampling variance and intersite correlation,  which requires a proper evaluation of the sampling covariance structure. Since some jurisdictions do not  have clear guidelines to perform this evaluation, a general procedure using copulas and a nonparametric  intersite correlation model is investigated to estimate sampling covariance structure in situations where no common at-site distribution is imposed or when some paired sites do not have common periods of record. The investigated methodology is applied on 771 sites in Canada. The Normal copula is verified to be an adequate model that better fit paired observations than other types of extreme copulas. A sensitivity analysis is carried out to evaluate the impact of either ignoring, or considering a simpler form of, intersite correlation. Additionally, super regions are defined based on drainage area and mean annual precipitation to improve the calibration of pooling groups across large territories and a wide range of climate conditions. Performance criteria based on cross-validation revealed that using super regions and a combination of geographic distance and similarity between catchment descriptors improves the calibration of the pooling groups by providing more accurate estimates."
2367	Evidential	"The timing and character of coarse siliciclastic sediment delivered to deep-water environments in active rift basins is governed by the complicated interactions of tectonics, climate, eustasy, hinterland geology, and shelf process regime. The stratigraphic archives of deep-water syn-rift basin-fills provide records of palaeoenvironmental changes (e.g. climate and vegetation) in onshore catchments, particularly where they are connected by narrow shelves. However, a chronostratigraphically constrained record of climatic fluctuations and process responses in the hinterland source area recorded in deep-water deposits is rare. Here, we integrate a fully cored research borehole with outcrop exposures of deep-water syn-rift stratigraphy to reconstruct palaeoenvironmental change within the stratigraphy of the West Xylokastro Fault Block in the Corinth Rift, Greece. We used palaeomagnetic and palynological analyses from borehole core samples to develop a chronostratigraphic and palaeoenvironmental model, which we compare to global records of Early-Mid Pleistocene climate and eustatic change. This framework allows establishment of a chronostratigraphic and palaeoenvironmental context to stratigraphic variability encountered in outcrop and in the borehole. Our results show that the ~240 m thick studied succession was deposited from ~1.1 to 0.6 Ma across the Early- to Mid-Pleistocene transition. During the Early Pleistocene, obliquity-paced climatic variability is largely coherent with vegetation changes of forest coverage within catchments on the southern margin of the Corinth Rift. Large magnitude, eccentricity-paced cyclicity dominant after the Mid-Pleistocene Transition can alter sediment supply from onshore catchments during the warming stages of severe interglacials where expansion of forest cover traps sediment within catchments. Conglomeratic grade sediment delivery to the deep-water is enhanced during glacial periods, interpreted to reflect sparse forest cover and large winter storms, and during semi-arid, grassland-dominated interglacial highstands during severe interglacials. Base-level rise during minor interglacials is easily outpaced by high sediment supply and is seldom represented stratigraphically. The study demonstrates the value of integrated palynological and sedimentological studies, whilst applying a conservative approach to interpretation when dealing with sparse palynological records from proximal deep-water stratigraphy. The case study provides conceptual models where climatic and vegetation changes can begin to be incorporated as a key control on sediment flux from onshore drainage basins to deep-water syn-rift successions."
6365	Evidential	"Accurate terrestrial gross primary productivity (GPP) estimates are crucial for developing effective climate change policies. However, quantifying GPP is challenging due to sparse ground observations and the complexity of plant functional types (PFTs). In this study, we address these challenges by evaluating various aspects of a data-driven model, including the architecture of time series deep learning models, the optimal sequence length for input data, and the selection of an appropriate PFT dataset to improve GPP prediction accuracy. We introduce FluxFormer, a comprehensive framework and global dataset designed to optimize GPP estimates from 2001 to 2020 at a 0.1-degree spatial resolution. FluxFormer leverages the updated global PFT dataset v2.0.8 from the ESA Land Cover Climate Change Initiative (ESA-CCI) and combines this with time series remote sensing and climate data using a Multivariate Time Series (MVTS) Transformer model. Our comprehensive evaluations show that FluxFormer‚Äôs model architecture and optimal sequence length selection significantly improve monthly GPP predictions and their mean seasonal cycle, especially in tropical regions. We also demonstrate that incorporating the ESA-CCI PFT dataset v2.0.8 yields a more reliable GPP dataset compared to using the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 1D PFT dataset. Additionally, FluxFormer exhibits reduced interannual variability in arid regions and captures a positive long-term GPP trend (2001-2021) consistent with carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization effects, an aspect missing in some existing datasets. FluxFormer can thus serve as a tool for refining carbon flux estimates and for cross-verifying datasets."
1000	Definitive	"Speleothem _18O values are commonly used to infer past climate variability. However, both non-linear karst hydrological processes and in-cave disequilibrium isotope fractionation are recognised and hinder the interpretation of _18O values. In recent years, proxy system models (PSMs) have emerged to quantitatively assess the confounding effects of these processes. This study presents the first integrated stalagmite _18O PSM (Karstolution) by coupling an existing karst hydrology with an in-cave fractionation PSM. The new modelling framework not only couples the two models, but also includes diffuse flow modelling, coupling of drip rate with infiltration, linking of surface with cave temperature, and incorporates cave seasonality effects. We test Karstolution using a cave monitoring dataset from Golgotha Cave, SW Australia. The predictive capacity of the model is assessed by comparing the output to stalagmite _18O values. By comparing with observed stalagmite _18O values, this study is also the first to quantify in-cave disequilibrium both kinetic isotopic fractionation in a speleothem and informs the conclusion that hydroclimatic processes contributes more to the variability of stalagmite _18O values at Golgotha Cave than does in-cave processes. This is further supported via a sensitivity analysis performed by simulating the impacts of a wider range of cave temperature, ventilation, drip interval and pCO2 values than measured."
1998	Evidential	"Slow-moving arctic soils commonly organize into striking large-scale spatial patterns called solifluction terraces and lobes. Though these features impact hillslope stability, carbon storage and release, and landscape response to climate change, no mechanistic explanation exists for their formation. Everyday fluids‚Äîsuch as paint dripping down walls‚Äîproduce markedly similar fingering patterns resulting from competition between viscous and cohesive forces. Here we use a scaling analysis to show that soil cohesion and hydrostatic effects can lead to similar large-scale patterns in arctic soils. A large new dataset of high-resolution solifluction lobe spacing and morphology across Norway supports theoretical predictions and indicates a newly observed climatic control on solifluction dynamics and patterns. Our findings provide a quantitative explanation of a common pattern on Earth and other planets, illuminating the importance of cohesive forces in landscape dynamics. These patterns operate at length and time scales previously unrecognized, with implications toward understanding fluid-solid dynamics in particulate systems with complex rheology."
6295	Definitive	"A small Arctic floodplain-lake (Tendammen, Colesdalen valley) in Svalbard revealed a laminated sediment sequence with numerous 14C AMS age-depth reversals in its 800 year history. In order to test the hypothesis that the anomalous dates result from catchment erosion and the deposition of reworked sediment and macrofossils, we applied luminescence profiling and flood-sensitive biological proxies. This revealed that many of the dates levels have high portable and laboratory-verified optically and infra-red stimulated luminescence (OSL/IRSL). This is interpreted as resulting from floods delivering partially unbleached sediment-aggregates along with plant macrofossils into the lake. This confirms that luminescence from lake cores can be used to identify flood events from lake sediments, which may often be associated with old carbon from the catchment depending upon catchment history. The flood record generated using a composite age-depth model (SCPs, uplift and selected 14C dates) is compared with other climate records and supports an increasing climatic variability over the last millennia as rapid warming proceeds in the High Arctic."
2888	Definitive	"Meeting carbon-reduction targets will require thorough consideration of climate variability and climate change due to the increasing share of climate-sensitive renewable energy sources (RES). One of the main concerns arises from situations of low renewable production and high demand, which can hinder the power system. We analysed energy droughts, defined as periods of low energy production (wind plus solar generation) or high residual load (demand minus production), in terms of two main properties: duration and severity. We estimated the joint return periods associated with energy droughts of residual load and power production.  We showed that moderate winter energy droughts of both low renewable production and high residual load occur every half a year,  while summer events occur every 3.6 and 2.4 years (on average).  As expected,  the occurrence of energy droughts tends to decrease with the degree of the severity of the energy drought, and moderate and extreme energy droughts showed longer return period for most countries. In general, we found a large variability across Europe in summer, with some countries (e.g. Italy) being more sensitive to energy droughts. Our results highlight the relevance of sharing RES during prolonged periods of low production and high demand."
5413	Exploratory	"The Anthropocene is the present time of human-caused accelerating global change, and new forms of Anthropocene risk are emerging that society has hitherto never experienced. Science and policy are grappling with the temporal and spatial magnitude of these changes, as well as the diminishing margin between science and policy itself. However, there is a gap in the transparency — and perhaps even in the awareness — of the profound role that Anthropocene science plays in shaping the structure and possibility of our future world. In this work, we explore three broad categories of Anthropocene science, including international energy scenarios, climate change projections, and the possibility of social collapse. These cases exemplify three key features of Anthropocene science: worlding capacity, values shaping what is possible, and refusal to consider all options. We discuss how Anthropocene science modulates new risks and systematically, though perhaps inadvertently, entrains certain social-ecological futures. We find that clarity in these three attributes of Anthropocene science could enhance its integrity and build trust, not least in the arena of public policy. We conclude with recommendations for improving the interpretability and scope of Anthropocene science in the context of a growing urgency for accurate information to inform our collective future."
5783	Evidential	"Gross primary productivity (GPP) is the largest carbon flux in the Earth system, playing a crucial role in removing atmospheric carbon dioxide and providing the sugars and starches needed for ecosystem metabolism. Despite the importance of GPP, however, existing estimates present significant uncertainties and discrepancies. A key issue is the underrepresentation of the CO2 fertilization effect, a major factor contributing to the increased terrestrial carbon sink over recent decades. This omission could potentially bias our understanding of ecosystem responses to climate change. Here, we introduce CEDAR-GPP, the first global upscaled GPP product that incorporates the direct CO2 fertilization effect on photosynthesis. Our product is comprised of monthly GPP estimates and their uncertainty at 0.05º resolution from 1982 to 2020, generated using a comprehensive set of eddy covariance measurements, multi-source satellite observations, climate variables, and machine learning models. Importantly, we used both theoretical and data-driven approaches to incorporate the direct CO2 effects. Our machine learning models effectively predicted monthly GPP (R2 ~ 0.74), the mean seasonal cycles (R2 ~ 0.79), and spatial variabilities (R2 ~ 0.67). Incorporation of the direct CO2 effects substantially improved the models’ ability to estimate long-term GPP trends across global flux sites. While the global patterns of annual mean GPP, seasonality, and interannual variability generally aligned with existing satellite-based products, CEDAR-GPP demonstrated higher long-term trends globally after incorporating CO2 fertilization, particularly in the tropics, reflecting a strong temperature control on direct CO2 effects. CEDAR-GPP offers a comprehensive representation of GPP temporal and spatial dynamics, providing valuable insights into ecosystem-climate interactions."
5153	Hypothetical	"Transformative adaptation is essential to face the unprecedented biodiversity and climate change crises. Nature-based Solutions (NbS) could accelerate the transformation of social-ecological systems to address climate change and biodiversity and Nature‚Äôs Contribution to People (NCP) loss. However, they are not widely implemented. Understanding the drivers of decision-making context that support NbS implementation is crucial to address potential bottlenecks and barriers. Here, we conducted semi-structured interviews with managers of twenty NbS implemented in the Alps. We investigated their decision-making contexts using the values-rules-knowledge framework and their transformative characteristics. Using a clustering analysis we identified three types of initiatives sharing similar groups of levers and barriers: the local transformation type implemented self-sufficient initiatives motivated by relational values to nature, supporting the adaptive capacity of nature through informal governance and experiential knowledge sharing; the green deal type implemented gradual change in practices using funding opportunities or regulations to experiment with new approaches fostering instrumental values of nature; ¬†the multi-scale co-production type implemented socially accepted NbS through wide participatory process with local practitioners, and the inclusion of diverse values in initiatives designed to be persistent even when challenged by the instability of funding opportunities. Based on these results we recommend that NbS related policies should: i) foster NbS implementation by local communities who faced economic constraints when implementing new practices; ii) support transdisciplinary programmes to create an inclusive network around NbS practices; and iii) adapt incentives to enable transformative adaptation through NbS. A macro-regional strategy may have the potential to face these challenges."
2977	Evidential	"Monitoring inland water levels is crucial for understanding hydrological processes to climate change impact leading to policy implementation. Satellite altimetry has proved to be an excellent technique to precisely measure water levels of rivers, lakes, and other inland water bodies. The ATL13 product of ICESat-2 space-borne LiDAR is solely dedicated to inland water bodies. The water surface heights were derived from ICESat-2's strong beams, and performance was assessed with respect to reservoir gauge observations. Statistical measurements were used to understand the agreement (R2= 0.99, %RMSE=0.08) among the datasets. An R2 value of 0.99 was observed between ICESat-2 derived water level anomaly and the reservoir storage anomaly. This study provides a unique opportunity to utilize the ATL13 data product to study reservoir water level variation and estimate the reservoir's storage. The methodology can also be helpful to understand the reservoir storage variation in a data-sparse region."
2960	Evidential	"Monogenetic volcanoes are among the most common volcanic landforms on Earth. The morphology and distribution of small volcanoes can provide important information about eruption dynamics and tectonics. The Southern Volcanic Zone of the Andes (CSVZ) comprises one of the most active magmatic regions on Earth. Characterized by the presence of polygenetic volcanoes and calderas in a complex tectonic setting, this region also hosts hundreds of small, back-arc monogenetic volcanoes. In this contribution, we apply a Geographic Information System (GIS) that combines imagery data and digital elevation models to establish the first comprehensive dataset of monogenetic volcanoes in the CSVZ (38° to 40° S), exploring their eruption dynamics and relationship to tectonic and structural processes. Combining spatial analysis and geomorphological observations, we identify the presence of 356 monogenetic volcanoes distributed into nine clusters, now grouped in the Zapala Volcanic Field (ZVF). The ZVF is marked by the predominance of cinder cones (80%) followed by phreatomagmatic volcanoes (20%), suggesting some influence of external water in the eruption dynamics. Generally, monogenetic vents present a clear association with local and regional lineaments, suggesting a strong structural control on the occurrence of the monogenetic deposits. The higher vent densities are observed in the southern Loncopué Though, an important extensional feature related to tearing of the subducted Nazca plate underneath the South American Plate. Morphometric parameters of cinder cones indicate variable stress orientations in the CSVZ that possibly result from the oblique tectonics in the region. From north to south, the maximum principal stress rotates from NE-SW to E-W and becomes progressively less constrained as it distances from the current magmatic arc. Based on the relative ages, we map the evolution of monogenetic volcanism through time. Our results suggest a waning in the monogenetic activity in ZVF over time. When compared to monogenetic fields in the Central Andes, the ZVF is marked by higher vent densities and number of phreatomagmatic landforms, with the absence of lava domes. This ultimately reflects the contrasting crustal structure and climate conditions of these two regions."
8676	Exploratory	"The Hindu Kush Himalaya cryosphere faces critical challenges from climate change, including rapid glacier melt and reduced snow cover. These changes threaten water resources, ecosystems, and livelihoods across the region. However, opportunities emerge through advanced monitoring technologies and increased scientific understanding. Improved remote sensing and field observations allow better assessment of cryospheric changes. Regional collaboration in research and data sharing enhances adaptive strategies. The cryosphere's role in climate regulation offers potential for carbon sequestration studies. Balancing development with preservation is crucial. Integrating traditional knowledge and modern science provides a path toward sustainable management of this vital Asian water tower."
1956	Definitive	"The risk from erosion and flooding in the coastal zone has the potential to increase in a changing climate. The development and use of coupled hydro-morphodynamic models is therefore becoming an ever higher priority. However, their use as decision support tools suffers from the high degree of uncertainty associated with them, due to incomplete knowledge as well as natural variability in the system. Here we show for the first time how the multilevel Monte Carlo method (MLMC) can be applied to hydro-morphodynamic models, in this case XBeach, to quantify uncertainty by computing statistics of output variables given uncertain input parameters. MLMC accelerates the Monte Carlo approach through the use of a hierarchy of models with different levels of resolution. A variety of theoretical and real-world coastal zone case studies are considered, for which output variables that are important to the assessment of flood and erosion risk are estimated, such as wave run-up height and total eroded volume. We show that MLMC can significantly reduce computational cost, resulting in speed up factors of 40 or greater compared to a simple Monte Carlo approach, whilst still maintaining the same level of accuracy. Furthermore, MLMC is used to estimate the cumulative distribution of these output variables for given uncertain parameters. This allows the risk of a variable exceeding a certain value to be calculated, for example the risk of the wave run-up height exceeding the height of a physical structure such as a seawall; this is a useful capability to inform decision-making processes."
6873	Exploratory	"The formation of phreatomagmatic volcanoes (PVs) usually involves small volumes of magma but also very violent eruptive activity. Along the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB) the basic conditions that favor water-magma interaction are provided by the presence of frequent small-volume monogenetic volcanism and several inter-montane lacustrine basins. The TMVB is a Plio-Quaternary continental volcanic arc dominated by >3000 monogenetic volcanic structures with only ~3% being the result of phreatomagmatic eruptions. Around 70% of these are clustered in three specific areas within volcanic fields in Valle de Santiago, Serdán-Oriental, and Los Tuxtlas. Here we investigate the low frequency of PVs and their selective locations and whether local environmental conditions play an important role in their formation. An inventory of 103 PVs within the TMVB has been compiled, including tuff cones, tuff rings, and maar-diatremes. The inventory contains morphometric parameters for each structure along with data regarding geological (internal) and environmental (external) parameters of the areas where the PVs are built. The magmatic flux is the first-degree influence in the formation of PVs. Different combinations of environmental parameters have a secondary-degree influence which varies spatially and temporally related to paleoclimate, hydrology, and hydrogeology. A couple of environmental parameter sets are met more often, reflected in the areas with clustered PVs, but less frequent sets of parameters are also detected, reflected in the scattered PVs. Morphometric correlations allow for a clear differentiation between the group of tuff cones and the group of maar-diatremes and tuff rings. In both groups elongated and compound shapes are more frequent. Very often, human settlements are built around or inside PVs. However, their shapes and relatively small size can be misguiding regarding the hazard that this type of volcanism represents, especially in the absence of knowledge about the conditions that result in these type of eruptions. This inventory allows for the study of the many different conditions and places in which a phreatomagmatic eruption could occur, providing a better base of information to prepare for future eruptions."
8587	Evidential	"On many frozen hillslopes, subsurface water above permafrost is routed through regularly spaced, linear features known as water tracks. We test whether water tracks form through thermal channelization, where heat from viscous dissipation in flowpaths deepens the active layer, creating a preferred flow path that attracts more water. We derive equations for suprapermafrost Darcy flow and, using linear stability analysis, we calculate growth rates and obtain wavelength selection for this system, which we compare to observed water track spacing from the high Arctic. Our model predictions are sensitive to flow speed, but the predicted cross-slope water track patterns are consistent with observed water track spacing under high flow conditions in the Low Arctic. Our model implies that signatures of changing climate might be found in changing water track spacing. However, feedback between flow and thaw is unlikely to drive flow path development in areas of low flow rate."
1564	Evidential	"Lake systems are important paleoclimate archives that preserve ecosystem and hydrologic responses to critical periods in Earth history, such as carbon cycle perturbations and glacial-interglacial cycles. Geochemical measurements of biogenic carbonate (for example, Œ¥18O, Œ¥13C, 87Sr/86Sr, [Li], [U], [Sr], and [Mg]) are indicators of hydrologic variability in lake systems throughout the geologic record. In this study, we present a new closed-basin lake modeling approach, HyBIM (the Hydrologic Balance Inverse Model), that employs a system of total differential equations and uses the measured Œ¥18O, Sr/Ca, and Mg/Ca of biogenic carbonate to determine changes in temperature, runoff, and lake evaporation. Using equally-spaced time steps, these equations are simultaneously solved to constrain the hydrologic parameters of the lake as recorded in biogenic carbonate. We use a Monte Carlo approach to account for uncertainty in the input parameters, such as Œ¥18O temperature relationships, partition coefficient uncertainty, and watershed solute chemistry.  For illustrative purposes, we apply the model to two ostracod valve datasets covering different timescales: (1) the Cretaceous Songliao Basin, northeast China, and (2) Holocene Lake Miragoane, Haiti. Modern water measurements of water isotopes and cation concentrations from each location are required as model inputs. We compare our modeling results with author interpretations and geologic observations. The modeling approach presented in this study can be applied to other closed-basin lake records, can be modified for other calcifying species (for example, gastropods or mollusks) or with calibration to inorganic lacustrine carbonate. In addition, this approach holds promise for extension with additional proxy measurements (that is, Œ¥D, U/Ca or Li/Ca) and changing source area on tectonic timescales using proxies that reflect changing source lithology (that is, Sr and Pb isotopes). Future incorporation of age model uncertainty in the Monte Carlo approach will also provide utility by quantifying temporal uncertainty on the hydrologic response recorded by lake sediments."
2512	Hypothetical	"Aerosol-cloud interactions constitute the largest source of uncertainty in assessments of anthropogenic climate change. This uncertainty arises in part from the inability to observe aerosol amounts at the cloud formation levels, and, more broadly, the vertical distribution of aerosols.  Hence, we often have to settle for less informative two-dimensional proxies, i.e. vertically aggregated data. In this work, we formulate the problem of disaggregation of vertical profiles of aerosols. We propose some initial solutions for such an aggregate output regression problem and demonstrate their potential on climate model data."
5234	Evidential	"Surface temperature is crucial in studying the Arctic climate, particularly during winter. We examine 1 m resolution surface temperature maps of 35 helicopter flights between 02 October 2019 and 23 April 2020, recorded during the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC). The seasonal cycle of the average surface temperature spans from 265.6 K on 02 October 2019 to 231.8 K on 28 January 2020. The surface temperature is affected by atmospheric changes and also varies across scales. Furthermore, we concentrate on leads in sea ice because they allow for greater heat exchange between ocean and atmosphere than thick, snow-covered ice. Leads, which appear considerably warmer than sea ice, are classified by a temperature threshold. The local scale (5–10 km) lead area fraction varies between 0% and 4% with a higher variability than on a regional scale (20–40 km), where leads cover a more stable fraction of 0-1% until mid-January when it increases to 4%. The variability in the lead area is caused by sea ice dynamics (opening and closing of leads), as well as thermodynamics with ice growth (lead closing). To understand better the ice rheology throughout the winter, we identify lead orientation distributions. We find that the orientation varies between different flights but the distribution mostly shows one prominent orientation peak. Thus, we are not able to determine predominant intersection angles, which would need two modes in the orientation distribution. The lead width distribution follows a power law with a negative exponent of 2.63, which agrees with literature values, proves the comparability to other datasets, and extends the existing relationship to the smaller scales, as observed here. The appearance of many more small leads compared to wider leads is important since they only occur on the sub-footprint scale of thermal infrared satellite data. Sub-satellite-footprint lead statistics are essential for Arctic-climate investigations because the ocean-atmosphere heat exchange does not scale linearly with lead area fraction and is larger for smaller leads."
3628	Evidential	"Studies of rainfall usually focus on the total amount precipitating throughout a certain period. Compared to rain rates associated with extreme events, the rain rates associated with the most frequent events is understudied. In this study, the characteristics of daily precipitation in India are explored using two metrics - rain frequency peak (the most frequent non-zero rain rate) and rain amount peak (the rain rate at which the most amount of rain falls). These metrics are computed over India using local and global datasets to investigate the characteristics of typical daily precipitation accumulations. These values are sensitive to the dataset used for this analysis since the temporal and spatial resolution of the rainfall data will influence the rain frequency peak and rain amount peak. Our study reveals the rain frequency peak is highest during the summer monsoon, while the winter season exhibits lower values, particularly at higher latitudes. Similarly, the rain amount distribution indicates dominance of heavy rain rates during the monsoon and post-monsoon seasons, leading to high total precipitation. The maximum rain frequency peak for any region in India reaches up to a value of 35 mm/day while the maximum rain amount peak reaches up to a value as high as 90 mm/day. These metrics would be useful in systematically evaluating typical daily precipitation in regional climate models and assessing downstream impacts of uneven precipitation such as lower crop yields, flood-drought alterations, and fluctuating water availability."
8199	Hypothetical	"Decarbonizing the building sector is a key priority in the European energy transition, as it is responsible for more than a third of the EU's GHG emissions. To boost energy renovation rates and efforts to phase out fossil fuel-based heating systems, current energy policy directives tar-get in particular the promotion of energy efficiency. However, implementing technology-oriented solutions for low-carbon energy and heating transitions raises a variety of issues, bearing also the risk of exacerbating energy and housing vulnerability.  This pre-print article explores potential synergies and trade-offs between climate neutrality and social justice, advocating for deliberative democracy and participation in co-designing systemic perspectives for low-carbon policy interventions. We focus on the city of Innsbruck, where both rents and shares of installed fossil fuel-based heating systems are among the highest in Austria. Our data builds on stakeholder interviews, policy analysis, and participatory systems mapping with citizens in a deliberation panel setting. We identify several structural key conditions that increase exposure to housing and energy vulnerability in Innsbruck, particularly among tenants and low-income households in Innsbruck. From a systemic perspective, we show how sharply rising rent and energy costs not only affect the disposable household income, but also reinforce dynamics that develop within the relationship between income, stress, renunciation, and mental health. We discuss the shortcomings of a narrow focus on energy efficiency policies, which may hinder the full potential of alleviating energy poverty and lead to adverse distributional impacts on vulnerable groups. Finally, we link a range of potential leverage points for socially just policy interventions to address the challenges of housing and energy vulnerability, including measures such as the highly debated social policy of rent control."
1019	Evidential	"Fire regime shifts are driven by climate and natural vegetation changes, but can be strongly affected by human land management. Yet, it is poorly known how exactly humans have influenced fire regimes prior to active wildfire suppression. Among the last 250 years, the human contribution to the global increase in fire occurrence during the mid-19th century is especially unclear, as data sources are limited. Here, we test the extent to which forest management has driven fire regime shifts in northern Poland. We combine multiple fire proxies (macroscopic charcoal and fire-related biomarkers) derived from highly resolved lake sediments, and apply a new robust statistical approach to classify source area- and temperature-specific fire regimes (biomass burnt, fire episodes). We compare these records with independent climate and vegetation reconstructions. We find two prominent fire regime shifts during the 19th and 20th centuries, driven by an adaptive socio-ecological cycle in human forest management. Although individual fire episodes were triggered mainly by arson during dry summers, the biomass burnt increased unintentionally during the mid-19th century due to the plantation of flammable, fast-growing pine tree monocultures needed for industrialization. State forest management reacted with active fire management and suppression during the 20th century. However, pine cover has been increasing since the 1990s and climate projections predict increasingly dry conditions, suggesting a renewed need for adaptations to reduce the increasing fire risk."
5794	Evidential	"Thermokarst lakes serve as key signs of permafrost thaw, and as point sources of CH4 in the present and near future. However, detailed information on the distribution of thermokarst lakes remains sparse across the entire permafrost region on the Qinghai–Tibet Plateau (QTP). In this research, we developed a new discrete wavelet transform (DWT)–based dual-input deep learning (DL) model using a convolutional neural network (CNN) framework to automatically classify and accurately predict thermokarst lakes. We created a new 3-way tensor dataset based on raw image data from more than 500 Sentinel-2 satellite lake images and decomposed those images using state-of-the-art M-band DWTs. We also incorporated non-image feature data for various climate variables. The special data treatment adds additional features and improves validation accuracy by up to 17%. As our data pre-processing does not require any manual polygon tracing, our method is more robust and can be upscaled easily without having to collect field data."
5076	Definitive	"The Agricultural Production Systems Simulator (APSIM) model was calibrated and validated and used to optimize the sowing window for mungbean (var. BARI Mung-6) at Gazipur, the South-central climatic zone of Bangladesh. Simulation was also done with elevated temperatures (1, 2 and 3 ¬∫C) to find out the adaptation option against future temperature stress situations. The model was run for eight sowing dates viz., February 20, March 05, March 10, March 15, March 20, March 25, March 30 and April 10 using long-term (41 years) historical weather data. A field experiment was carried out with BARI Mung-6 under four sowing dates (March 10, March 20, March 30, and April 10) during 2021 for model evaluation. The APSIM model was calibrated with the data from March 10 sowing, while validation was done with other sowing dates along with long-term (1981 to 2021) weather data. The evaluations with the experimental data showed that the model performance was satisfactory to predict crop phenology, total biomass and grain yields for BARI Mung-6. Simulated yields during March 10 to March 25 sowing was very similar to attainable seed yields while, very early or late sowing gave comparatively lower seed yields with higher variability over the years. The best planting window was from March 15 to March 25 which simulated the highest mean seed yield with less variability over the years. Climate change scenario analyses at 1, 2 and 3 ¬∫C rises in temperature revealed that 1¬∞C increase in temperature has no significant influence on seed yields across the sowing dates but significant yield reductions were observed with the rise of temperatures by 2 and 3 ¬∞C on March 20, March 30 and April 10 sowings. Elevated temperatures showed positive impact on seed yield of March 10 sowing only. Results revealed that optimum sowing window for mungbean is from March 15 to March 25 under existing weather conditions but in future, sowing mungbean seeds in March 10 would be the option to combat temperature rise stress situations for sustained productivity."
2393	Hypothetical	"Snowball Earth cap carbonate sequences provide an archive of what are likely the most dramatic climate transitions in all of Earth history. One approach to gain insight into these events is the detailed observation of sedimentary structures within these post-glacial units. Here, we report on newly discovered radially-symmetric sedimentary structures within the Keilberg Member post-Marinoan ‘cap dolostone’ from the Otavi Group of northwest Namibia. We describe the local expression of over 60 decimeter-scale cymbal or disc structures from a single location. We interpret these features, which we name Zildjian structures, to be of likely abiotic origin. Through morphological comparisons, we suggest that Zildjian structures are most similar to Astropolithon, a pseudofossil which formed as a result of fluid or gas expulsion."
6805	Exploratory	"Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is vital to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and mitigating climate change. Most CCS projects rely on the permanent geological storage of CO2 within deep sedimentary rock formations, but accurately constraining the capacity of these reservoirs usually involves detailed and computationally demanding reservoir modelling and simulation of the pressure evolution and CO2 plume migration. In the absence of this, efficiency factors are often used within volumetric capacity estimates, but this often results in overestimations of storage capacity. As an alternative, we propose a workflow harnessing various, existing, reduced complexity models that account for the surface topography and dynamic fluid behaviour in a computationally efficient manner. We first undertook a static analysis using algorithms available within MRST-co2lab. The reservoir topography is used to determine the locations of structural traps, the trapping routes that link them and downdip filling areas that feed a given trap. This analysis provides indications of the optimal well placement and helps us refine the total capacity of the area into the capacity available just from structural trapping. We followed this with a dynamic analysis, also within MRST-co2lab, using computationally efficient Vertical Equilibrium models. This efficiency allowed us to performing hundreds of simulations and use these results to map storage efficiency and determine the optimal well placement where efficiency is greatest. We tested this workflow within an area of the Malay Basin with illustrative reservoir parameters and estimated storage efficiency, capacity and the optimal well placement within the area without performing any full-physics simulations. The results from VE modelling indicate that the amount that can be contained within this area is 15 times less than the predictions using static storage efficiency factors. The advantage of such a light approach is that sensitivity and uncertainty analysis can be carried out at speed, before targeting certain parameters/areas for more detailed study."
5120	Exploratory	"Unsupervised classification is becoming an increasingly common method to objectively identify coherent structures within both observed and modelled climate data. However, in most applications using this method, the user must choose the number of classes into which the data are to be sorted in advance. Typically, a combination of statistical methods and expertise is used to choose the appropriate number of classes for a given study, however it may not be possible to identify a single `optimal' number of classes. In this work, we present a heuristic method, the Ensemble Difference Criterion, for unambiguously determining the maximum number of classes supported by model data ensembles. This method requires robustness in the class definition between simulated ensembles of the system of interest. For demonstration, we apply this to the clustering of Southern Ocean potential temperatures in a CMIP6 climate model, and show that the data supports between four and seven classes of a Gaussian Mixture Model."
5658	Exploratory	"Detailed sequence stratigraphy of the Eocene-Miocene Mrayt Group in North-Western Rif (Morocco), allow identifying the nature and the sources of the sediment supplies, the sedimentary facies and the depositional environments as well as the factors that controlled the sedimentation. This work made it also possible to identify 16 facies sequences that have never been described before. facies sequences, indicate that the sedimentation occurs under a complex hydrodynamics strongly influenced by river discharge, tidal currents and wave’s processes in an estuary, a tide dominated delta   and waves and tide dominated nearshore. These depositional systems occur at the margin of the Maghrebian foredeep sedimentary basin under the interplay of climate, tectonic and eustacy."
2064	Evidential	"Observations of warm past climates and projections of future climate change show that the Arctic warms more than the global mean, particularly during winter months. Past warm climates such as the early Eocene had above-freezing Arctic continental temperatures year-round. In this paper, we show that a reduced Arctic land seasonality with increased greenhouse gases is a robust consequence of the smaller surface heat capacity of land (compared to ocean), without recourse to other processes or feedbacks. We use a General Circulation Model (GCM) with no clouds or sea ice and a simple representation of land. The equator-to-pole surface temperature gradient falls with increasing CO2, but this is only a near-surface phenomenon and occurs with little change in total meridional heat transport. The high-latitude land has about twice as much warming in winter than in summer, whereas high-latitude ocean has very little seasonality in warming. A surface energy balance model shows how the combination of the smaller surface heat capacity of land and the nonlinearity of the temperature dependence of surface longwave emission gives rise to the seasonality of land surface temperature change. The atmospheric temperature change is surface-enhanced in winter as the atmosphere is near radiative-advective equilibrium, but more vertically homogeneous in summer as the Arctic land gets warm enough to trigger convection. While changes in clouds, sea ice, and ocean heat transport undoubtedly play a role in high latitude warming, these results show that enhanced land surface temperature change and surface-enhanced atmospheric temperature change in winter can happen in their absence for very basic and robust reasons."
4715	Exploratory	"With technological enhancements, the volume, velocity, and variety (3Vs) of the raw digital Earth data have increased in recent years. Due to the increased availability of computer resources and the growing popularity of deep learning applications, this data has been a crucial source for data-driven studies that have transformed the fields of climate and earth science. One of the critical data sources is precipitation supporting climate and earth science studies on modeling, forecasting, and preparedness for extreme events (i.e., floods, droughts, pollution transport). In this study, we worked on an extensive review of manuscripts focusing on use of deep learning methods to tackle challenges either to improve the quality or extrapolate (forecast) rainfall datasets. The purpose of this study is to summarize the most recent developments in deep learning approaches for forecasting rainfall or improving rainfall datasets, as well as highlighting issues, shortcomings, and open questions with insightful recommendations for future directions."
6036	Exploratory	"The past evolution of the East Asian Monsoon (EAM) was affected by remote climate processes. However, there is uncertainty surrounding these teleconnections and their impact on each seasonal EAM mode during periods of rapid global change. Here we use the unique biannual precipitation patterns of central Japan to reconstruct winter and summer EAM evolution during the last glacial termination (22,000 – 10,000 cal BP). Oxygen isotope analysis of diatoms and hydrogen isotope analysis of n-alkanoic acids from the Lake Suigetsu sediment cores show that in Japan the winter EAM weakened and the summer EAM strengthened with deglaciation. Only the summer mode exhibited variations coeval with stade-interstade fluctuations. A relationship between the summer EAM and Antarctic temperature post-16,000 cal BP supports a remote link to the Southern Hemisphere. These trends were different to continental EAM records and highlight the value of broadening the geographical range of reconstructions to rationalise system heterogeneities."
3518	Exploratory	"To accurately evaluate the spatiotemporal variability of ecosystem functions and services, as well as biodiversity, under a rapidly changing climate and shifting anthropogenic activities, it is an important but challenging task to retrieve information about past relationships among society, people‚Äôs lives, and the landscape. We watched documentary TV programs broadcast by the Japanese public broadcasting station (NHK) about 30 years ago to examine these past relationships in the Republic of Sakha (formerly the Yakut Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic) in eastern Siberia at the end of the 1980s (the ‚Äúperestroika era‚Äù). We viewed 3 episodes of the documentary ‚ÄúNHK Special: The Arctic Circle‚Äù and summarized the content of the episodes. The importance of discovering mammoth tusks in this Arctic region to acquire foreign currency was highlighted, as was the relationship between nomadic peoples in Chukchi and managers of their sovkhoz. A trip down the Lena River featured the relationships of economic activities and ethnic minorities in the perestroika era, highlighting the importance of natural resources and the local environment. Despite limitations caused by production choices and historical background and unconscious bias of people at that time, and copyright and privacy issues, we concluded that old TV programs can be useful resources to retrieve information about people‚Äôs lives and landscapes in the past."
2396	Exploratory	"Little research has been done on projecting long-term conflict risks in response to climate change. Such projections are currently neither included in the development of socioeconomic scenarios or climate change impact assessments nor part of global agenda-setting policy processes. In contrast, in other fields of inquiry, long-term projections and scenario studies are established and relevant for both strategical agenda-setting and applied policies. Although making projections of armed conflict risk is surrounded by uncertainty, there are good reasons to further develop scenario projections of the future trajectory of armed conflict. In this perspective article we discuss why making quantitative projections of armed conflict in response to climate change is inherently uncertain, but necessary for shaping sustainable future policy agendas. We argue that both quantitative and qualitative projections can have a purpose in future climate projections and put out the challenges this poses for future research directions."
6240	Exploratory	"The islands of Remote Oceania were among the last places on Earth colonised by humans. Lapita seafarers carrying with them an extensive root-tuber-tree crop complex and domestic animals, rapidly transformed nearly all of these previously unoccupied islands. However, the timing of initial Lapita settlements and the early introduction of horticulture remain a matter of debate as significant changes in climate coincided with human oceanic explorations in the mid-late Holocene. Here we show that fossil biomarkers preserved in sedimentary archives located near Teouma, the earliest dated Lapita cemetery in Remote Oceania, trace human presence and horticultural practices while providing the climatic context for the initial settlement. Using fossil faecal molecules, the hydrogen isotopic composition of leaf waxes, and palmitone, a molecular marker for the staple crop taro (Colocasia esculenta Schott), we identified signatures of human activity spanning the period of occupation recorded at the Teouma site. The temporal precision provided by our high-resolution radiocarbon chronology refines the settlement timing with a first unequivocal human trace appearing at 2739-2879 BP. The presence of taro in the initial settlement period attests to the early introduction and likely rapid expansion of horticulture by the first settlers. Lower leaf wax hydrogen isotope ratios starting approximately 2900 years ago further reveal that the initial settlement coincided with a transition to a wetter period, possibly driven by shifts of the South Pacific Convergence Zone. Our findings provide evidence of early horticulture in Remote Oceania and reveal the climatic context that favoured first human settlements in the islands."
7890	Evidential	"Rice agriculture is a major source of atmospheric methane, but current emission inventories are highly uncertain, mostly due to poor rice-specific inundation data. Inversions of atmospheric methane observations can help to better quantify rice emissions but require high-resolution prior information on the location and timing of emissions. Here we use Landsat satellite data at 30 m resolution to identify flooded vegetation and combine this information with a 30 m global cropland database, rice-specific data, and a recent global dataset of emission factors (EFs) per unit of rice paddy area. The resulting Global Rice Paddy Inventory (GRPI) provides methane emission estimates at 0.1o_ 0.1o (~10 km _10 km) spatial resolution and monthly resolution. Evaluation of GRPI with independent rice area data and FLUXNET-CH4 eddy flux measurements shows good agreement. Our global emission of 39.3 ± 4.7 Tg a-1 for 2022 (best estimate and error standard deviation) is higher than previous inventories that use outdated rice maps and IPCC-recommended EFs now considered too low. GRPI shows the largest discrepancy from previous inventories in South Asia, where rice agriculture has rapidly developed but outdated rice maps fail to represent it. China is the largest rice emitter in GRPI (8.2 ± 1.0 Tg a-1), followed by India (6.5 ± 1.0 Tg a-1), Bangladesh (5.7 ± 1.2 Tg a-1), Vietnam (5.7 ± 1.0 Tg a-1), and Thailand (4.4 ± 0.9 Tg a-1). These five countries together account for 78% of global total rice emissions. The seasonality of emissions varies between countries depending on local climate and cultivation practices. We define a rice methane intensity (methane emission per unit of rice produced) to assess the potential of mitigating methane without compromising food security. We find national methane intensities ranging from 10 to 120 kg methane per ton of rice produced (global mean 51) for major rice-growing countries. Countries can achieve low intensities with high-yield cultivars, upland rice agriculture, water management, and organic matter management."
1938	Evidential	"The glaciers of the tropical Andes have been observed to be losing mass for much of the last century. These changes are both driven by, and an indicator of global climate change. These glaciers are important as they represent a crucial water source for downstream communities, supplying agriculture, urban usage, industry, mining and hydropower. This study aims to quantify glacial mass loss for the Cordillera Blanca and Cordillera Huaytapallana for the period 1972-2018, as well as identify potential meteorological drivers of these changes in order to extend the mass balance record back in time and understand the long-term regional causes of glacial recession. In order to do this Landsat imagery is used to identify glaciers, alongside repeat DEMs derived from satellite altimetry and historic maps. DEMS are used to measure glacier surface elevation changes and calculate mass balance. Comparisons with time-series of meteorological data are conducted to identify potential forcing factors of glacial mass balance. The results of this study show that the glaciers of CB (-0.45 ± 0.08 m yr 1 w.e) and CH (-0.48±0.12 m yr 1 w.e) have undergone substantial mass loss over the last 50 years. Variations in mass balance are observed based on glacier aspect and elevation, as well as over the different time periods studied. Meteorological analysis identifies precipitation phase and humidity to be the main forcing factors of Cordillera Blanca mass balance, with air temperature and precipitation phase important for the Cordillera Huaytapallana."
2666	Evidential	"Between 2015–2018, we collected approximately 2000 water column measurements of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) concentrations in the North American Arctic Ocean during summer and early fall. We also obtained 25 measurements of CH4 and N2O concentrations in rivers along the Northwest Passage and Ellesmere Island in mid-summer 2017–2019. Our results show that N2O is generated in the highly productive Bering and Chukchi Seas and transported northeastward, producing a persistent subsurface N2O peak in the Beaufort Sea. The Chukchi and Beaufort Sea sediments are a significant source of CH4 to the water column. These sedimentary sources and associated water column consumption display significant spatial gradients and interannual variability. CH4 isotope data demonstrate the importance of CH4 oxidation across the study region. We find that rivers are not a significant source of CH4 or N2O to the Arctic Ocean at the time of year sampled. The estimated annual sea-air flux across the study region (2.3 million km2) had a median (first quartile, third quartile) of 0.009 (0.002, 0.023) Tg CH4 y-1 and _0.003 (_0.013, 0.010) Tg N y-1. These results suggest that the North American Arctic Ocean currently plays a negligible role in global CH4 and N2O budgets. Our expansive dataset, with observations at many repeat stations, provides a synopsis of present-day Arctic CH4 and N2O distributions and their range of variability, as well as a benchmark against which future climate-dependent changes can be evaluated."
5183	Hypothetical	"Mangrove forests, which are essential for the maintenance of terrestrial and marine biodiversity on tropical coasts and constitute the main blue-carbon ecosystems for the mitigation of global warming, are among the world‚Äôs most threatened ecosystems. Mangrove conservation can greatly benefit from paleoecological and evolutionary studies, as past analogs documenting the responses of these ecosystems to environmental drivers such as climate change, sea level shifts and anthropogenic pressure. A database (CARMA) encompassing nearly all studies on mangroves from the Caribbean region, one of the main mangrove biodiversity hotspots, and their response to past environmental shifts has recently been assembled and analyzed. The dataset contains over 140 sites and ranges from the Late Cretaceous to the present. The Caribbean was the cradle of Neotropical mangroves, where they emerged in the Middle Eocene (~50 million years ago; Ma). A major evolutionary turnover occurred in the Eocene/Oligocene transition (34 Ma) that set the bases for the shaping of modern-like mangroves. However, the diversification of these communities leading to their extant composition did not occur until the Pliocene (~5 Ma). The Pleistocene (the last 2.6 Ma) glacial-interglacial cycles caused spatial and compositional reorganization with no further evolution. Human pressure on Caribbean mangroves increased in the Middle Holocene (~6000 years ago), when pre-Columbian societies began to clear these forests for cultivation. In recent decades, deforestation has significantly reduced Caribbean mangrove cover and it has been estimated that, if urgent and effective conservation actions are not undertaken, these 50 million-year-old ecosystems might disappear in a few centuries. A number of specific conservation and restoration applications based on the results of paleoecological and evolutionary studies are suggested."
1479	Evidential	"The Labrador Sea is one of the few regions on the planet where the interior ocean can exchange heat directly with the atmosphere via strong, localized, wintertime convection, with possible implications for the state of North Atlantic climate and global surface warming. Using an observationally-constrained ocean adjoint model, we find that annual mean Labrador Sea heat content is sensitive to temperature/salinity changes (1) along potential source water pathways (e.g. the subpolar gyre, the North Atlantic Current, the Gulf Stream) and (2) along the West African and European shelves, which are not significant source water regions for the Labrador Sea. The West African coastal/shelf adjustment mechanism, which may be excited by changes in along-shelf wind stress, involves pressure anomalies that propagate along a coastal waveguide towards Greenland, changing the across-shelf pressure gradient in the North Atlantic and altering heat convergence in the Labrador Sea. We also find that non-local (in space and time) heat fluxes (e.g. in the Irminger Sea, the seas south of Iceland) can have a strong impact on Labrador Sea heat content. Understanding and predicting the state of the Labrador Sea and its potential impacts on North Atlantic climate and global surface warming will require monitoring of oceanic and atmospheric properties at remote sites in the Irminger Sea, the subpolar gyre, and along the West African and European shelf/coast system, among others."
2400	Hypothetical	"Many cities and settlements are organized around alluvial rivers, which are self-formed channels composed of gravel, sand and mud. Much of the time alluvial river channels are oversized, in that they could accommodate greater water flow; yet during extreme storms they are woefully undersized, and potentially catastrophic flooding can occur. Considering widely varying hydroclimates, sediment supply, geologic constraints and varying vegetation, it is not altogether obvious that rivers should achieve an average channel geometry that is pattern stable – let alone predictable from theory. Yet, natural rivers follow remarkably consistent hydraulic-geometry scaling relations, that are reproduced in laboratory experiments. Starting with the constraint that channel formation requires that fluid stress exceeds the threshold for sediment entrainment, we review the explanatory power of threshold channel models. Moreover we explore how deviations from threshold channel theory relate to higher-order dynamics of fluid and sediment transport — essentially perturbations to the threshold state — clarifying misconceptions regarding model applicability. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of the threshold channel framework for understanding channel patterns and responses to variations in external forcing such as hydroclimate and land use. Accurate field determination of the entrainment threshold itself is a notorious problem, and emerges as a central challenge in further development and application of threshold channel theory."
3414	Hypothetical	"Overwash is the cross-shore transport of water and sediment from a waterbody over the crest of a sand or gravel barrier beach, and washover is the resulting sedimentary deposit. Washover volume, and alongshore patterns of washover distribution, are fundamental components of sediment budgets for low-lying coastal barrier systems. Accurate sediment budgets are essential to forecasting barrier system sustainability under future climate-driven forcing. However, comprehensive surveys of three-dimensional washover morphology are challenging to deliver. Here, we use the results of a physical experiment, analysis of lidar data, and examples of washover characteristics reported in the literature to develop scaling relationships for washover morphometry that demonstrate volume can be reasonably inferred from planform measurements, for washover in natural (non-built) and built barrier settings. Gaining three-dimensional insight into washover deposits from two-dimensional information unlocks the ability to analyze past aerial imagery and extract subaerial sand budgets for past storms."
2866	Definitive	"We further developed a space-time Kalman approach to estimate time-variable signals in residual altimeter systematic errors and vertical land motion (VLM) around the Australian coast since the 1990s, through combining multi-mission absolute sea-level (ASL), relative sea-level (RSL) from tide gauges (TGs) and GPS heights records. Our results confirmed continent-wide subsidence and TG-specific VLMs yielding a ~40% reduction in RMSE of geographical ASL variability, compared with rates determined using spatially interpolated GPS velocities that fail to capture localized trends by up to ~1.5 mm/yr. Stacked time series of non-linear deformation at TGs and nearby GPS showed some correlation, suggesting the technique was partially successful in reflecting the surface loading. Site-by-site inspection revealed spurious non-linearity likely caused by residual oceanographic signals present between the TG and altimeter measurement locations. Our average mission-specific error estimates are small but significant, typically within ~±0.5-1.0 mm/yr, with negligible effect implied on the overall rate of ASL. Analysis of the time variability of altimeter errors confirmed stability for most missions except for Jason-2 with an anomaly reaching ~2.8 mm/yr in the first ~3.5 years of operation which is supported by analysis from the Bass Strait altimeter validation facility. Weak correlation with the dominant climate mode suggests potential deficiencies in the resolution of the time-variable gravity field used for orbit determination as a possible cause, yet other drivers cannot be discounted. Our approach advances the ability to estimate TG-specific VLMs and regional altimeter systematic errors, and highlights that residual oceanographic signals remain a fundamental limitation to such techniques."
2144	Evidential	"The tropical Northern Andes of Colombia are one the world's most biodiverse places, offering an ideal location for unraveling the linkages between the geodynamic forces that build topography and the evolution of the biota that inhabit it. In this study, we utilize geomorphic analysis to characterize the topography of the Western and Central Cordilleras of the Northern Andes. We supplement our topographic analysis with erosion rate estimates based on gauged suspended sediment loads and river incision rates from volcanic sequences. In the northern Central Cordillera, an elevated low-relief surface (2,500m in elevation, ~40x110 km in size) with quasi-uniform lithology and surrounded by knickpoints, indicates a recent increase in rock and surface uplift rate. Whereas the southern segment of the Central Cordillera shows substantially higher local relief and mostly well graded river profiles consistent with longer term uplift-rate stability. We also identify several areas of major drainage reorganization, including captures and divide migrations that are supported by our erosion and incision rate estimates. These changes in the topography coincide with the proposed location of a slab tear and flat slab subduction under the northern Central Cordillera, as well as with a major transition in the channel slope of the Cauca River. We identify slab flattening as the most likely cause of strong and recent uplift in the Northern Andes leading to ~2 km of surface uplift since 8-4 Ma. Large scale drainage reorganization of major rivers is probably mainly driven by changes in upper plate deformation in relation to development of the flat slab subduction geometry; however, other factors such as climate and emplacement of volcanic rocks likely play secondary roles in this process. Several isolated biologic observations above the area of slab flattening suggest that surface uplift isolated former lowland species on the high elevation plateaus, and drainage reorganization may have influenced the distribution of aquatic species."
2498	Evidential	"Submarine canyons with heads located close to shorelines, known as shore-connected canyons, provide a focussed pathway for basinward sediment transport. Placing greater constraints on the key parameters that control the formation of shore-connected canyons can help us predict the efficiency of sediment export to deep-water under different environmental conditions and through time. Using a numerical model incorporating geomorphic principles, we show that shore-connected canyons are most active when fluvial discharge is high, the continental shelf is steep and narrow, and the magnitude of relative sea-level change is high. The numerical model reproduces observed bathymetric distributions of shore-connected submarine canyons, indicating that the empirical relationships underlying these numerical models are accurate descriptions of shore-connected canyon formation in nature. Our study provides constraints on the key quantifiable parameters controlling shore-connected submarine canyon formation and maintenance, such as fluvial discharge and basin physiography, allowing for more accurate predictions of the efficiency and timing of sediment transfer to the deep sea under different conditions. The model results suggest that; 1) submarine canyons may form frequently on the slope due to submarine processes, but subaerial processes control which submarine canyons are most likely to connect to the shoreline, 2) margin physiography and sediment supply are more influential in driving submarine canyon incision across the shelf and sediment transfer than the exact nature of the gravity flow triggering mechanism, and 3) the stratigraphic records of shore-connected submarine canyons and fans are more influenced by onshore climate and tectonics than eustasy."
5088	Evidential	"As global maritime traffic increases, seaports grow to accommodate and compete for higher volumes of trade throughput. However, growth trajectories of seaport footprints around the world have gone unmeasured, likely because of a lack of readily available spatio-temporal data. Here, we use geospatial analysis of global satellite imagery from 1990‚Äì2020 to show that 65 seaports among the world's top 100 container ports, as ranked by reported throughput, have been expanding rapidly seaward. Collectively, these seaports have added approximately 978 km2 in gross port area in three decades through coastal land reclamation. We also find that the relationship between footprint expansion and throughput volume is highly variable among seaports. Understanding patterns of seaport expansion in space and time informs global assessments of critical infrastructure and supply chain vulnerability to climate-driven hazard. Seaport expansion also sets up complex trade-offs in the context of environmental impacts and climate adaptation."
1908	Hypothetical	"Because the 2015 Paris Agreement will not prevent dangerous climate change, there is an urgent need to develop an alternative mitigation strategy.   Even if most countries greatly increase their commitments and technological breakthroughs accelerate the transition to emission-free technologies, the 2°C target will still be overshot due to systemic inertia from existing greenhouse gases, warming oceans, and the decades required to replace existing infrastructure. Compounding risks are: (a) Most policy-makers greatly underestimate the scale, severity and duration of climate change, and the non-linear impacts of lags, feedbacks and tipping points; (b) Although all IPCC mitigation scenarios require the large-scale deployment of climate geoengineering, many methods may not be politically and/or technologically feasible; (c) While most scenarios assume climate overshoot will occur before safe climates are re-established, many human and environmental systems cannot adapt to higher temperatures. Temperatures likely to cause catastrophic and/or irreversible damage pose unacceptable risks.  Developing a feasible mitigation strategy will require prioritising research both on climate overshoot risks, and on the relative effectiveness, risks, costs and timelines of potential mitigation methods. Since both carbon removal geoengineering and solar geoengineering will be required to rapidly mitigate dangerous climate change, the viability and risks of all potential geoengineering methods need to be investigated.   This research is a prerequisite for evaluating the comparative benefits, costs and risks of using, or not using, various forms of mitigation.  A realistic risk management plan can then be developed containing mitigation targets that are precise, measurable and attainable, with clear constraints on the magnitude and duration of both climate overshoot risks and mitigation methods."
5262	Definitive	"Soil erosion is a major environmental problem worldwide, and almost half of India’s total geographical area is susceptible to it. The Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) has been widely used globally to estimate soil erosion, and Soil erodibility factor, denoted by K-factor, is an essential component of RUSLE. Although previous studies have assessed soil erodibility in India, they have been limited to small scales such as watersheds or districts. A national scale assessment of soil erodibility doesn’t exist and is critical to developing a systematic understanding of soil erosion over India. In this study, we estimated soil erodibility factors over India using RUSLE Nomograph and Environmental Policy Integrated Climate (EPIC) model approaches at a high resolution of 250 m. Our results showed that the K-factor estimated using the Nomograph approach was more accurate than the observed soil erodibility factors. Additionally, we developed erodibility indices such as CR (Clay Ratio), MCR (Modified Clay Ratio), and CLOM (Critical Level of Organic Matter) to assess their sensitivity with respect to soil erodibility factors. Finally, we created a susceptibility to erosion map over India using CLOM index classification. The national average soil erodibility factor for India is estimated to be 0.028 t-ha-h/ha/MJ/mm. Histosols soil type is the least susceptible to erosion, while Xerosols soil type is most susceptible among the prevalent soil classes in India. This is the first national-scale mapping of soil erodibility over India, providing an essential asset for soil conservation and erosion management planning by experts."
5717	Hypothetical	"Sustainable economic development and resilience to climate change impacts require human adaptation to a warming climate. It is possible that rising costs of climate change will provide incentives to increase adaptation actions in the future. This Perspective argues, by contrast, that adaptation to the costs of global warming is likely to be ineffective. Empirical evidence suggests that current adaptations are generally limited, and climate change is likely to undermine adaptive capacity, making intensification of the costs of warming as likely as adaptation to them. Climate adaptation will require difficult political action and is not an inevitable consequence of climate damages."
2458	Hypothetical	"Multi-fluid models have recently been proposed as an approach to improving the representation of convection in weather and climate models. This is an attractive framework as it is fundamentally dynamical, removing some of the assumptions of mass-flux convection schemes which are invalid at current model resolutions. However, it is still not understood how best to close the multi-fluid equations for atmospheric convection. In this paper we develop a simple two-fluid, single-column model with one rising and one falling fluid. No further modelling of sub-filter variability is included. We then apply this model to Rayleigh-B√©nard convection, showing that, with minimal closures, the correct scaling of the heat flux (Nu) is predicted over six orders of magnitude of buoyancy forcing (Ra). This suggests that even a very simple two-fluid model can accurately capture the dominant coherent overturning structures of convection."
1229	Exploratory	"Rain-on-snow (ROS) events are complex multivariate hydrometeorological phenomena requiring a combination of rain and snowpack. Impacts include floods and landslides, and rain may freeze within the snowpack or on bare ground, potentially affecting vegetation, wildlife, and permafrost. ROS events occur mainly in high-latitude and mountainous areas, where sparse observational networks hinder accurate quantification – as does a scale mismatch between coarse (50-100 km) resolution re-analysis products and localised events. Variability in the rain-snow temperature threshold, and temperature sensitivity of snowmelt, adds additional uncertainty. Here the high-resolution (1 km) seNorge hydrometeorological dataset, capturing complex topography and drainage networks, is utilized to produce the first climatology of ROS events for mainland Norway. For daily data spanning 1957-2016, suitable rain and snowpack thresholds for defining ROS events are applied to construct ROS climatologies for 1961-1990 and 1981-2010, and investigate trends. Differing ROS characteristics are found, reflecting Norway’s diverse climates. Compared to 1961-1990, events in the 1981-2010 period decrease most in the southwest in winter, southeast in spring, and north in summer (consistent with less snow cover in a warming climate), and increase most in the southwest, central mountains, and north in winter-spring (consistent with increased precipitation and/or more snow falling as rain in a warming climate). Events also broadly correlate with the North Atlantic and Arctic Oscillations, with the latter dominating slightly. Finally, the extreme May 2013 ROS event in central Oppland county, causing devastating flooding, is examined to better understand the interplay between rain, snow, and temperature, with a view to future studies."
7265	Exploratory	"Rivers drive geomorphic change at Earth’s surface by transporting sediment from mountains to sedimentary basins. They are sensitive to changes in water and sediment flux driven by tectonism, climatic perturbation and or volcanism. We characterized changes in fluvial landscapes during a major Cenozoic cooling event, the Eocene-Oligocene Transition (EOT) at 33.9 Ma. The EOT is characterized by a long term ~4-5°C decrease in global mean annual temperature, punctuated by short, intense climatic fluctuations. In the Great Plains region of central North America, the temperature decreased by ~7°C and  mean annual precipitation declined by ~50% across the EOT. Preceding the EOT, renewed Cordilleran uplift near northeastern Nevada began at ~39 Ma and extensive volcanism in the Great Basin region occurred at ~36 Ma. We reconstruct characteristics of rivers and floodplains through the Late Eocene-Early Oligocene deposits of White River Group (WRG), exposed at Toadstool Geologic Park in northwestern Nebraska, U.S.A., and evaluate how river landscapes responded to these events. We identified five stages of change in the paleo-rivers and -floodplain strata of the White River Group: (1) Following the Laramide uplift, the rivers of the Late Eocene Chamberlain Pass Formation adjusted from steep gradients (~10-3) to gentler ones (~10-4), and transitioned from shallow, mobile channels to deeper, stable channels and floodplains. (1) The transition from the Chamberlain Pass Formation to the Late Eocene Chadron Formation saw a shift from a relatively coarse-grained fluvial system with mobile channels to an extremely fine-grained, aggradational, floodplain-dominated system influenced by high volcanogenic sediment loads. (3) The transition from the Late Eocene Chadron Formation to the Early Oligocene Orella Member of the Brule Formation is associated with the onset of the Eocene-Oligocene Transition (EOT) and is marked by coarse floodplains and ephemeral river deposits that display evidence of significant, likely seasonality-driven, discharge variability. (4) Early Oligocene strata (33.9 - 31.6 Ma) also show compelling evidence of recurrent episodes of sustained channel incision and fill that we connect to climate fluctuations associated with the early phase of relatively rapid EOT cooling. (5) Early Oligocene strata deposited from 33.4 to 31.6 Ma show no significant erosional surfaces and continue to reflect discharge variability, high volcanogenic sediment loads, and a relatively stable climate system after the end of the initial phase of rapid cooling."
1989	Definitive	"GWP* was recently proposed1 as a simple metric for calculating warming-equivalent emissions by equating a change in the rate of emission of a short-lived climate pollutant (SLCP) to a pulse emission of carbon-dioxide. Other metrics aiming to account for the time-dependent impact of SLCP emissions, such as CGWP, have also been proposed2. In 2019 an improvement to GWP* was proposed by Cain et al3, hereafter CLA, combining both the rate and change in rate of SLCP emission, justified by the rate of forcing decline required to stabilise temperatures following a recent multi-decade emissions increase. Here we provide a more direct justification of the coefficients used in this definition of GWP*, with a small revision to their absolute values, by equating CO2 and SLCP forcing directly, without reference to the temperature response. This provides a more direct link to the impulse-response model used to calculate GWP values and improves consistency with CGWP values."
3111	Evidential	"Over the last decades, treatment of domestic wastewater promoted by environmental regulations have reduced human health risks and improved water quality. However, ecological risks caused by effluents of wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) discharged into rivers still persist. Moreover, the evolution of these ecological risks in the future is intimately related to effects of changing climate, especially regarding streamflow in receiving rivers. Here, we present a systematic and transferable framework for assessing the ecological risks posed by individual WWTP-effluents at the catchment-scale. The framework combines the size-class k of WWTPs, which is a proxy for load, with the location of their outflows in river networks, represented by its stream-order _. We identify ecological risks by using three proxy indicators: the urban discharge fraction and the local-scale concentrations of each total phosphorous and ammonium-nitrogen discharged from WWTPs. About 3,200 WWTPs over three large catchments (Rhine, Elbe, and Weser) in Central Europe were analyzed by incorporating simulated streamflow for the most extreme projected climate change scenario. We found that WWTPs causing ecological risks in future prevail in lower stream-orders, across almost all size-classes. Distinct patterns of ecological risks are identified in the k-_ framework for different indicators and catchments. We show that, as climate changes, intensified risks are especially expected in lower stream-orders receiving effluents of intermediate size WWTPs. We discuss implications of our findings for prioritizing WWTPs advancement and urging updates on environmental regulations. Further applications of the k-_ framework are discussed to help achieving global long-term commitments on freshwater security."
6238	Evidential	"In high northern latitudes, the Middle to Late Holocene was a time of orbitally-induced atmospheric cooling. This led to increased sea-ice production in the Arctic Ocean and its export southward, a decrease in sea surface temperatures (SST), and glacier advances at least since 5-4 ka BP. However, the response of the ocean-climate system to decreasing insolation was not uniform. Our research shows that the sea-ice cover in the northwestern Barents Sea experienced a late response to Neoglacial cooling. We analyzed dinoflagellate cyst assemblages from a sediment core from Storfjordrenna, south of Svalbard. We found that the area experienced ice-free conditions throughout most of the Mid- and Late Holocene. It was only after 2.3 ka BP that the study site became covered with winter drift ice and primary productivity decreased subsequently. Other regional data support the decrease in SST, the expansion of the sea-ice cover, and the deterioration of the environmental conditions around that time. Our findings indicate that the sea-ice cover in the northwestern Barents Sea required a significant amount of time to respond to the general cooling trend in the region. These results have important implications for present-day environmental changes. Even if the current warming trend is revoked in the future, the observed sea-ice loss in the Barents Sea may be incredibly challenging to reverse."
5468	Evidential	"Lakes are sentinels of environmental change. In cold climates, lake ice phenology—the timing and duration of ice cover during winter—is a key control on ecosystem function. Ice phenology is likely driven by a complex interplay between physical characteristics and climatic conditions. Under climate change, lakes are generally freezing later, melting out earlier, and experiencing a shorter duration of ice cover; however, few long-term records exist for large, high-elevation lakes which may be particularly vulnerable to climate impacts. Here, we quantified ice phenology over the last century (1927-2022) for North America’s largest high-elevation lake—Yellowstone Lake—and compared it to seven similar lakes in northern Europe. We show that contrary to expectation, the ice phenology of Yellowstone Lake has been uniquely resistant to climate change. Indeed, despite warming temperatures in the region, no change in the timing nor duration of ice cover has occurred at Yellowstone Lake due to buffering by increased snowfall. However, with projections of continued warming and shifting precipitation regimes in the high Rocky Mountains, it is unclear how long this buffering will last."
8520	Definitive	"Rewetting of drained peatland forests restores ecosystem functions and improves peatland ecological status. It is also considered to mitigate climate change, yet some studies challenge this view Recently, Laine et al. (2024, Restoration Ecology, 32(7), p.e14213) considered feasible restoration outcomes of boreal forestry drained peatlands and proposed that rewetting nutrient-rich peatland forests can yield immediate climate benefits. They, however, focused only on the change of soil greenhouse gas balance following rewetting. Here, we extend their analysis by including tree stand carbon sink-source dynamics, direct radiative forcing by albedo change, and broaden the system boundaries to include wood product carbon storage. We show that restoring nutrient-rich drained boreal peatland forests contributes to climate warming in short- and medium term (<200 yr), except in specific cases when tree stand carbon storage is preserved. Rewetting nutrient poor boreal peatland forests yield to persistent warming impact. Results show that ecological benefits of rewetting drained boreal forest peatlands have a climate cost, and rewetting is unlikely to mitigate climate change in the timescale commensurate with that of, e.g., EU climate goals."
2418	Definitive	"Canada could highly impact the climate, as it possesses the world’s third largest resources of unconventional oil. This paper evaluates in three ways whether Canada is respecting a scenario of fossil fuel production and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions limiting warming to 2.0 °C by 2100. Firstly, McGlade and Ekins (2015) proposed a model providing production budgets for each fossil fuel producing country. Data show that Canada has extracted more unconventional oil than allocated for the entire century. Secondly, global GHG emissions from the Canadian fossil fuel industry were computed using a life-cycle analysis. Emissions increased by 32% from 2011 to 2019, although dropping 4.9% in 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Results also show that an increase of 1% in Canadian fossil fuel industry emissions cancels out at the global level a decrease of 2.1% in national emissions. Thirdly, three models providing a national carbon budget for Canada were compared to annual emissions. Emissions were higher than the targets set by these models. In conclusion, Canadian GHG emissions and unconventional oil production exceeded the amounts allowed by the 2°C scenario during the 2011-2020 period. Policies to reduce exports of fossil fuels and mitigate national emissions are discussed."
2436	Exploratory	"Density-driven chimney effect airflow is the most common form of cave ventilation, allowing gas exchange between the outside and the karst subsurface. However, cave ventilation can also be driven by other mechanisms, namely winds. We discuss the mechanism and dynamics of wind-driven ventilation using observations in Postojna Cave, Slovenia. We show how seasonal airflow patterns driven by the chimney effect are substantially modified by outside winds. Wind flow over irregular topography forms near-surface air pressure variations and thus pressure differences between cave entrances at different locations. These pressure differences depend on wind speed and direction and their relationship to surface topography and the location of cave entrances. Winds can act in the same or opposite direction as the chimney effect and can either enhance, diminish or even reverse the direction of the density-driven airflows. To examine the possibility of wind-driven flow, we used a computational fluid dynamics model to calculate the wind pressure field over Postojna Cave and the pressure differences between selected points for different configurations of wind speed and direction. We compared these values with those obtained from airflow measurements in the cave and from simple theoretical considerations. Despite the simplicity of the approach and the complexity of the cave system, the comparisons showed satisfactory agreement. This allowed a more general assessment of the relative importance of wind pressure for the subsurface ventilation. We are certain that this example is not unique and that the wind-driven effect needs to be considered elsewhere to provide better insights into the dynamics of cave climate, air composition or dripwater geochemistry."
5690	Definitive	"Building a resilient water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) system is more important than ever since climate change threatens WASH, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. The Government of Ethiopia stresses climate-resilient WASH through its One WASH National Program, albeit it may be challenging to ascertain the resilience due to the absence of an easy-to-use monitoring tool. The “How tough is WASH” framework is a recently developed framework to monitor the community-managed rural water supply resilience to climate change. We investigated whether this framework might be used to assess the resilience of small-town water utilities by choosing 10 communities in eastern Ethiopia. The How Tough is WASH framework considers resilience along six domains: supply chain, institutional support, management and governance, community role and feedback, infrastructure, and catchment using a five-scale measurement. Due to its complexity to apply using a five-scale measure, we modified the framework into a simpler 3-point scale —low, medium, and high—to assess the climate change resilience of urban water utilities. Accordingly, the town water utilities rated moderately resilient, with primary failures including insufficient government support, a lack of flood protection, seasonal variation in yield, and leakage in the distribution system. Fixing the identified failures is essential for resilient services in the study towns. The current finding using the How Tough is WASH framework revealed the framework’s versatility in determining the climate resilience of WASH, therefore, should be included and integrated into a WASH monitoring tool."
2109	Evidential	"The present study has been carried out to assess the spatial behaviour of forest fire count (FFC) data and Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR) derived meteorological parameters in Uttar Pradesh to explore the linkages amongst them. Ten years (2005 to 2014) of forest fire event data and of meteorological data have been analysed using GIS overlay, ordinary least square (OLS) regression, increment ratio (IR) and combination matrix analysis (CMA) to find spatial congruence and causal linkage between FFC and meteorological variables. The results show that approximately 80% of total forest fires occur in March & April only. And, at ten days interval, 65% FFCs were recorded from 21 March to 20 April only. With OLS and IR methods, we found a linkage between FFC and rainfall, relative humidity, solar radiation, and temperature. In contrast, CMA indicated a periodicity in the FFCs of the highest category."
4980	Definitive	"The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is the major current in the Southern Ocean, isolating the warm stratified subtropical waters from the more homogeneous cold polar waters. The ACC flows from west to east around Antarctica and generates an overturning circulation by fostering deep-cold water upwelling and the formation of new water masses, affecting the Earth's heat balance and the global distribution of carbon. The ACC is characterized by several water mass boundaries or fronts, known as Subtropical Front (STF), Subantarctic Front (SAF), Polar front (PF), and South Antarctic Circumpolar Current Front (SACCF), identified by typical physical and chemical properties. While the physical characteristics of these fronts have been characterized, there is still poor information regarding the microbial diversity of this area. Here we present surface water bacterioplankton community structure based on 16S rRNA sequencing from 13 stations sampled between New Zealand to the Ross Sea crossing the Antarctic Circumpolar Current Fronts.. Our results show a distinct succession in the dominant bacterial phylotypes present in the different water masses and suggest a strong role of sea surface temperatures and the availability of Carbon and Nitrogen in controlling community composition. This work represents an important baseline for future studies on the response of Southern Ocean epipelagic microbial communities to climate change."
1899	Hypothetical	"The response of summer precipitation in the western U.S. to climate variability remains a subject of uncertainty.  For example, paleoclimate records indicate the North American monsoon (NAM) was stronger and spatially more extensive during the Holocene, whereas recent modeling suggests a weakened NAM response to increasing temperatures. These illustrate diverging pictures of the NAM response to warming.  Here, we examine summer precipitation in the southwestern U.S. related to Last Interglacial insolation forcing. Using a high-resolution climate model, we find that Eemian insolation forcing results in overall wetter conditions throughout most of the southwestern U.S, but significantly drier than present conditions over Arizona. The overall wetter conditions are associated with a northward shift of the anticyclonic circulation aloft and increased moisture in the lower and mid-troposphere during the Eemian. Increased advection of Gulf of Mexico moisture is responsible for increasing precipitation in New Mexico and the northern edges of the NAM region. Drier conditions over Arizona are likely related to reduced local convection associated with reduced vertical moisture transport. These results highlight the spatial complexity of the NAM response to increasing radiative forcing and allow a better understanding of monsoon dynamics and variability in response to a warming climate."
1841	Evidential	"The large-scale moistening of the atmosphere in response to increasing greenhouse gases amplifies the existing patterns of precipitation minus evaporation (P-E) which, in turn, amplifies the spatial contrast in sea surface salinity (SSS). Through a series of CO2 doubling experiments, we demonstrate that surface salinification driven by the amplified dry conditions (P-E < 0), primarily in the subtropical ocean, accelerates ocean heat uptake. The salinification also drives the sequestration of upper-level heat into the deeper ocean, reducing the thermal stratification and increasing the heat uptake through a positive feedback. The change in Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation due to salinification plays a secondary role in heat uptake.  Consistent with the heat uptake changes, the transient climate response would increase by approximately 0.4K without this process. Observed multi-decadal changes in subsurface temperature and salinity resembles those simulated, indicating that anthropogenically-forced changes in salinity are likely enhancing the ocean heat uptake."
2219	Definitive	"Climate changes across the last 24,000 years provide key insights into Earth system responses to external forcing. Climate model simulations and proxy data have independently allowed for study of this crucial interval; however, they have at times yielded disparate conclusions. Here, we leverage both types of information using paleoclimate data assimilation to produce the first observationally constrained, full-field reanalysis of surface temperature change spanning the Last Glacial Maximum to present. We demonstrate that temperature variability across the last 24 kyr was linked to two modes: radiative forcing from ice sheets and greenhouse gases; and a superposition of changes in thermohaline circulation and seasonal insolation. In contrast with previous proxy-based reconstructions our reanalysis results show that global mean temperatures warmed between the early and middle Holocene and were stable thereafter. When compared with recent temperature changes, our reanalysis indicates that both the rate and magnitude of modern observed warming are unprecedented relative to the changes of the last 24 kyr."
5300	Hypothetical	"Scenario pathways greatly inform the opportunity space of possible future climates. The multistep experiment tests the Alternative Method to Determine a Carbon Dioxide Removal Target‚Äôs thesis by simulating the novel pathway '300x2050,' SSP1-2.6, and SSP1-1.9 comparing within green growth development in MAGICC 6.8 by removing all cumulative anthropogenic CO‚ÇÇ over 80 years and phasing out anthropogenic GHGs. Contrary to the previous theory, the experiment removed carbon equal to accumulated fossil fuels and land-use change emissions, realizing a final temperature of 0.07¬∫C relative to 1720-1800, 0.14¬∫C to the 1850-1900 mean, and CO‚ÇÇ concentration of 278.82 ppm by 2550. The vast CDR needed to approximate the speculation of Anthropocene reversal by 2100 justifies utmost urgency and maximally scaled sustainable (zero-carbon intensity) green growth development."
7000	Definitive	"Rapid agriculture-driven deforestation raises significant concerns about achieving climate and biodiversity targets. Linking deforestation to food production is crucial for guiding the development, implementation, and evaluation of forest conservation and climate change mitigation efforts. However, the limited scope and comprehensiveness of available datasets restrict the effectiveness of these efforts. Recognising this, we present the Deforestation Driver and Carbon Emission (DeDuCE) model, merging the best available spatial and statistical datasets to enhance the quantification of deforestation due to the production of agriculture and forestry commodities. DeDuCE reports 9,332 unique country-commodity deforestation-carbon footprints across 179 countries and 184 commodities from 2001-2022, surpassing existing databases in scope and detail. The model provides critical data for public and private sector actors assessing deforestation risks, evaluating the sustainability of investments, and reporting food sector carbon emissions. Notably, our deforestation emissions constitute nearly half of previously reported emissions from land-use activities within global food systems. Moreover, global efforts to curb deforestation are inadequately focused on staple crops, which are also significant drivers of deforestation."
3240	Exploratory	"Countless continuously interacting processes determine the functioning and evolution of the Earth. Even geodynamic and climate changes, which have been classically studied independently because they pertain to different Earth ‘spheres’, are linked by mutual cause-effect relationships that recent research has just started to recognize and quantify. Modeling, be it analogue or numerical, is a trump card in this research for it allows rigorous integrations and interpretations of multiple observations that report on processes with different characteristic spatial and temporal scales and occurring at the Earth’s surface or deep within its interior. In this solicited chapter, I let my academic journey thus far illustrate the challenges of the study of the feedbacks between internal and external Earth dynamics and its relevance for the Earth Sciences as well as for facing and mitigating ongoing fast and extreme global changes."
1935	Exploratory	"In intracontinental basins stratigraphic packages are not as predictable as those deposited in marine settings, namely due to a lack over an overriding control on deposition. Deposition in intracontinental basins is controlled by tectonics, climatic variations, and sediment supply. Complexity is added as deposition is affected by both autocyclic localised variations (e.g., lobe switching) and larger scale allocyclic variations such as climate forcing, leading to rapid changes in depositional environment. This research considers a basin margin depositional system predominately controlled by climatic variations and presents a model to highlight how the individual depositional environments respond to wetting and drying events. Alluvial fan related environments (e.g., talus cone, debris flows, sheetfloods) prograde into the basin during increased humidity, whereas increased aridity leads to retrogradation. Fluvial environments (e.g., fluvial, palaeosol) react in the same manner, prograding during humid climates and retrograding during increasing aridity. Lacustrine environments expand in the basin centre during increased humidity, and desiccate and shrink during arid climates. Finally, aeolian environments decrease in magnitude and migration is reduced during increased humidity but grow in extent during increased aridity. A case study from the end-Carboniferous to Permian Cutler Group (undifferentiated) in the western U.S.A. is used to build the model as it comprises an exceptionally well-preserved basin margin system."
6353	Exploratory	"Access to clean water is a fundamental human right, yet millions worldwide face the dire consequences of water scarcity and inadequate sanitation. Water inequality, characterized by disparities in access and availability of water resources, has emerged as a critical global challenge with far-reaching social, economic, and environmental implications. Using a globally representative observational streamflow dataset and Gini coefficients, this study investigates how streamflow inequality, which has a large impact on inequality of water availability, varies spatially and temporally, and its relationship with different underlying catchment characteristics. This study finds that watersheds in arid climates exhibit a higher degree of streamflow inequality than polar and equatorial ones. Africa experiences the highest streamflow inequality, followed by Australia, while South America experiences relatively lower streamflow inequality. Around 19.6% of the catchments in Australia display an increasing trend in streamflow inequality, pointing to worsening conditions. Conversely, South America experiences a decreasing trend in streamflow inequality in 18.3% of its catchments during the same period. It is also found that a more evenly distributed precipitation within the catchment and higher dam storage capacity corresponds to more evenly distributed streamflow availability throughout the year. This study enhances our understanding of streamflow inequality worldwide, which will aid policy formulation to foster sustainable development."
1158	Exploratory	Draft guidance on the homogenisation of climate station data of the World Meteorological Organisation.
5605	Evidential	"Satellite-based remote sensing enables detection and mitigation of large point sources of climate-warming methane. These satellites will have the greatest impact if stakeholders have a clear-eyed assessment of their capabilities. We performed a single-blind test of nine methane-sensing satellites from three continents and five countries, including both commercial and government satellites. Over two months, we conducted 82 controlled methane releases during satellite overpasses. Six teams analyzed the resulting data, producing 134 estimates of methane emissions. Of these, 80 (58%) were correctly identified, with 46 true positive detections (34%) and 34 true negative non-detections (25%). There were 41 false negatives and 0 false positives, in which teams incorrectly claimed methane was present. All eight satellites that were given a nonzero emission detected methane at least once, including the first single-blind evaluation of the EnMAP, Gaofen 5, and Ziyuan 1 systems. In percent terms, quantification error across all satellites and teams is similar to aircraft-based methane remote sensing systems, with 55% of mean estimates falling within ¬±50% of the metered value. Although teams correctly detected emissions as low as 0.03 metric tons of methane per hour, it is unclear whether detection performance in this test is representative of real-world field performance. Full retrieval fields submitted by all teams suggest that in some cases it may be difficult to distinguish true emissions from background artifacts without a known source location. Cloud interference is significant and appears to vary across teams and satellites. This work confirms the basic efficacy of the tested satellite systems in detecting and quantifying methane, providing additional insight into detection limits and informing experimental design for future satellite-focused controlled methane release testing campaigns."
8379	Evidential	"The urban canopy layer (UCL) exhibits complex, heterogeneous flow patterns shaped by urban geometry. Traditionally, research has relied on microscale simulations over limited and often idealized building arrays, leaving a need for more extensive datasets to capture the dynamics across diverse urban neighborhoods. Responding to this gap, we developed an extensive dataset, known hereafter as UrbanTALES, based on state-of-the-art Large Eddy Simulations (LES) over 538 urban layouts (generated using over 3,000,000 CPU hours and 35 TB of storage) with both idealized and realistic configurations. Realistic urban neighborhood configurations were obtained from major cities worldwide, incorporating wide variations in building plan area densities [0.06-0.64] and height distributions [4-50m]. Idealized urban arrays, on the other hand, include two commonly studied configurations (aligned and staggered building arrays), featuring both uniform and variable height scenarios along with oblique wind directions.  UrbanTALES offers canopy-averaged flow data as well as 2D and 3D flow fields tailored for different applications in urban climate research such as the development and testing of urban canopy models. The dataset provides time-averaged wind flow properties, as well as second- and third-order flow moments that are critical for understanding turbulent processes in the UCL. Here, we describe the UrbanTALES dataset and its applications, noting the unique opportunity to use high-fidelity simulated flow in realistic urban neighborhoods to: a) revisit neighborhood-scale urban canopy parameterizations in various climate models; and b) inform in-canopy flow and turbulent analyses in complex urban configurations. UrbanTALES is openly available at https://urbantales.climate-resilientcities.com/ and can be extended to incorporate future LES datasets in the field."
7647	Evidential	"Atmospheric blocking is a key dynamical phenomenon in the mid- and high latitudes, able to drive day-to-day weather changes and meteorological extremes such as heatwaves, droughts and cold waves. Current global circulation models struggle to fully capture observed blocking frequencies, likely because of their coarse horizontal resolution. Here we use convection permitting, nested idealized model simulations for quantifying changes in blocking frequency and Rossby wave breaking compared to a coarser resolution reference. We find an increase in blocking frequency poleward and downstream of the area with increased resolution, while the exact regions depend on the blocking index. These changes are probably due to a more accurate representation of small-scale processes such as diabatic heating, which affect Rossby wave breaking and blocking formation downstream. Our results thus suggest an improved representation of blocking in the next generation of high-resolution global climate models."
8797	Evidential	"The famous 1961 'Fairbridge Curve' of Holocene sea level (SL) shows metre-scale (up to ~5m) oscillations, based on a worldwide compilation of carbon-dated geological data-points. Dozens of later authors found further evidence for such fluctuations; while dozens of others, including the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), deny oscillations >50cm. The debate is settled here by (1) a review of the Holocene SL literature, exposing flaws in the techniques and assumptions used in constructing smooth SL curves, and (2) an exhaustive review (companion study by the author) of copious published English coastal archaeology, proving a ~4-metre SL rise in only ~70 years (~430-500AD, early 'Dark Ages'), equating to Fairbridge's global 'Rottnest transgression', but much more precisely dated (dendrochronology, coins, pottery). Thus, the IPCC's opinion that global mean SL has risen faster since 1900 than over any preceding century in at least the last 3,000 years is incorrect. This vindication of Fairbridge implies that IPCC's 'worst-case' predicted SL rise of 1.75m by 2100 is, in fact, unexceptional. Another companion study argues that 'Fairbridge-type' SL rises must be due to Antarctic ice-cliff-collapse events, attributable to warming by solar grand maxima, apart from the next collapse (anthropogenic), predicted to raise SL at least 3m by 2100."
3076	Definitive	"Estimates of global economic damage caused by carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions can inform climate policy. The social cost of carbon (SCC) quantifies these damages by characterizing how additional CO2 emissions today impact future economic outcomes through altering the climate. Previous estimates suggest that large, warming-driven increases in energy expenditures could dominate the SCC, but they rely on models that are spatially coarse and not tightly linked to data. Here we show that the release of 1t CO2 today is projected to reduce total future energy expenditures, with most estimates valued between -$3 and -$1, depending on discount rates. Our results are based on a new architecture that integrates global data, econometrics, and climate science to estimate local dam- ages worldwide. Notably, we project that emerging economies in the tropics will dramatically increase electricity consumption due to warming, requiring critical infrastructure planning. However, heating reductions in colder countries offset this increase globally. We estimate that 2099 global electricity consumption rises ‚àº 4.5 EJ/yr (7% current global consumption) while direct consumption of other fuels declines ‚àº 11.3 EJ/yr (7% current consumption) per +1‚ó¶C increase in global mean temperature. Our finding of net savings contradicts previous research, because global data indicate that many populations will remain too poor for most of the 21st century to substantially increase energy consumption in response to warming. Importantly, damage estimates would differ if poorer populations were given greater weight."
8810	Evidential	"A weakening of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is predicted to occur under multiple scenarios of future warming. However, the effect of meltwater from a decaying Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) on AMOC is uncertain. Using a basin-wide network of North Atlantic sediment cores, we show that the largescale melting of the GrIS during a previous interglacial (Marine Isotope Stage 11c (MIS11c); 397 ‚Äì 427 ka) led to a millennial-scale, 30¬±15% weakening of AMOC and an associated abrupt 2 ‚Äì 7‚Å∞C cooling event over the subpolar North Atlantic. Furthermore, we reveal that this AMOC weakening occurred due to a combination of an abrupt transient weakening of Iceland Scotland Overflow Water and a preceding long-term decline in the strength of Denmark Straits Overflow Water, as well as an earlier cooling of the western subpolar gyre. Paleoclimate datasets indicate that this re-arrangement of ocean circulation had an impact on terrestrial ecosystems and atmospheric/oceanic circulation across the northern hemisphere and the low latitudes. This study suggests that modern oceanographic conditions are analogous to those prior to the MIS11c AMOC weakening event, with comparable modern rates of GrIS melt to those modelled for MIS11c. Critically, these findings provide empirical evidence that suggests the potential vulnerability of AMOC weakening to GrIS decay."
2342	Evidential	"2019 was the hottest and driest year on record for southeast Australia leading to bushfires of unprecedented extent. Ecosystem carbon losses due to drought and fire are believed to have been substantial, but have not been well quantified. Here, we utilize space-based measurements of trace gases (TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument XCO, Orbiting Carbon Observatory 2 XCO2) and up-scaled GPP (FluxSat GPP) to quantify the carbon cycle anomalies resulting from drought and fire in southeast Australia during the 2019‚Äì2020 growing season. We find that biomass burning released 113‚Äì236 TgC of CO2 while drought and fire-induced anomalies in net ecosystem exchange reduced growing season carbon uptake by an additional 19‚Äì52 TgC of CO2. These carbon losses were concentrated during the spring and early summer, when hot-dry conditions were most severe. A shift to cooler conditions with above average rainfall during February is found to result in a partial recovery and greening in unburned ecosystems, but not in fire-impacted areas. The net 2019‚Äì2020 carbon loss substantially exceeded interannual variations in net uptake over 2010‚Äì2019 estimated from top-down constraints (~5œÉ anomaly), and exceeded Australia‚Äôs annual fossil fuel emissions (~104 TgC year‚àí1). Top-down constraints show that the regional carbon budget is strongly regulated by climate variability, and suggest cool‚Äìwet conditions are required for a rapid recovery of carbon stocks. This has implications for the regional carbon budget as more frequent climate-change-driven heat and drought events may increase the frequency of fire events and the recovery time of ecosystems, threatening the carbon stocks of the region."
8341	Exploratory	"Can a repeating climate event be termed as a cosmic hyperobject? Even if it is dynamically changing within hundreds of thousands of years? At the center of this paper is the science: observable data, 15,000 years of climate change on Rapa Nui. Reaching into the past however we begin with a much broader mathematical view from the eyes of Milankovitch theories of the cosmos that stretches a million years or more. Narrowing down from the cosmos to the atmosphere and into the biosphere ¬†landing onto a tiny island in the South Pacific Ocean we find the hyperobject in focus, a grandiose forest covering the landscape with what was the largest living and breathing giant palms ever known on earth. The water that is contained within the roots, stems and leaves of 16 million giant palms, is an enormous watery energy that was the life breath of this ancient island. As all hyperobjects are expected to be interwoven, this paper will move through time, following the storyline of adaptation and a changing culture view. ¬†Stepping out into the future it is now Twenty-Twenty-Seven, the projected return of a long term climate event that changed the island and these trees forever. To the Rapa Nui people, this AKU, an invisible interactive entity is perhaps what we call today the Hyperobject. Can an awakening of an Aku of the past still contain the resilience needed to sustain through the returning climate event of 2027?"
3457	Evidential	"A dominant narrative is that addressing population is not relevant to mitigating climate change because population is only growing in the poorest countries, whose contribution to global emissions is negligible. An analysis of carbon emissions and population for the World Bank’s four income-based country groups, however, shows that: (i) the low-income group represents the smallest fraction of the global population (8%), while the largest fraction (43%) belongs to the lower-middle group, whose contribution to global emissions is not negligible; (ii) population is growing not only in the low-income group, but in all four groups; (iii) fertility remains above replacement rate in almost all countries in the low-income and lower-middle groups, in about half of the countries of the upper-middle group, and in 3 countries of the high-income group; (iv) population growth has been the main driver of increased carbon emissions over the last three decades, both in the high-income group and at the global level."
4894	Hypothetical	"Stratospheric aerosol injection is a proposed form of solar climate invention (SCI) that could potentially reduce the amount of future warming from externally-forced climate change. However, more research is needed, as there are significant uncertainties surrounding the possible impacts of SCI, including unforeseen effects on regional climate patterns. In this study, we consider a climate model simulation of the deployment of stratospheric aerosols to maintain the global mean surface temperature at 1.5¬∞C above pre-industrial levels (ARISE-SAI-1.5). Leveraging two different machine learning methods, we evaluate when the effects of SCI would be detectable at regional scales. Specifically, we train a logistic regression model to classify whether an annual mean map of near-surface temperature or total precipitation is from future climate change under the influence of SCI or not. We then design an artificial neural network to predict how many years it has been since the deployment of SCI by inputting the regional maps from the climate intervention scenario. In both detection methods, we use feature attribution methods to spatially understand the forced climate patterns that are important for the machine learning model predictions. The differences in regional temperature signals are detectable in under a decade for most regions in the SCI scenario compared to greenhouse gas warming. However, the influence of SCI on regional precipitation patterns is more difficult to distinguish due to the presence of internal climate variability."
5602	Evidential	"Climate variability affects sea levels as certain climate modes can accelerate or decelerate the rising sea level trend, but subseasonal variability of coastal sea levels is under-explored. This study is the first to investigate how remote tropical forcing from the MJO and ENSO impact subseasonal U.S. coastal sea level variability. Here, composite analyses using tide gauge data from six coastal regions along the East and West Coasts of the U.S. reveal influences on sea level anomalies from both the MJO and ENSO. Tropical MJO deep convection forces a signal that results in U.S. coastal sea levels anomalies that vary based on MJO phase. Further, ENSO is shown to modulate both the MJO sea level response and background state of the teleconnections. The sea level anomalies can be significantly enhanced or weakened by the MJO-associated anomaly along the East Coast due to constructive or destructive interference with the ENSO-associated anomaly, respectively. The West Coast anomaly is found to be dominated by ENSO. Consistent relationships between low-level zonal and meridional winds and sea level pressure are found to be spatially-varying drivers of the variability. Two case studies reveal how MJO and ENSO teleconnection interference played a role in notable coastal flooding events. Much of the focus on sea level rise concerns the long-term trend associated with anthropogenic warming, but on shorter time scales, we find subseasonal climate variability has the potential to exacerbate the regional coastal flooding impacts."
6427	Exploratory	"This study employs the cGENIE Earth System Model to investigate the effects of the Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) and Indonesian Archipelago (IA) closure on global meridional thermohaline circulation (THC). Over a simulated period of 10,000 years, the analysis centers on critical variables, including surface density, vertical density profiles, global overturning circulation, and ocean ventilation age. The results reveal nuanced, non-statistically significant changes, emphasizing the regional influence of the ITF. Specifically, surface density anomalies manifest post-IA closure, notably in southern Mindanao and eastern Australia. Concurrently, anomalies in global overturning circulation indicate reduced vertical transport intensities in the Southern Ocean.  While cGENIE offers valuable insights, its limitations underscore the necessity for incorporating more complex climate models. This acknowledgment underscores the ongoing imperative to refine Earth System Models for a comprehensive understanding of the intricate interactions that shape global ocean dynamics and climate."
5168	Evidential	"Atmospheric macroturbulence transports energy down the equator-to-pole gradient. This is represented by diffusion in energy balance models (EBMs), and EBMs have proven valuable to understanding and quantifying the pattern of surface temperature change. They typically assume climate-state independent diffusivity, chosen to well represent the current climate, and find that this is sufficient to emulate warming response in general circulation models (GCMs). Here, we examine the role that changes in diffusivity play in the large-scale equator-to-pole contrast in surface warming in EBMs, motivated by theories for polar amplified warming. New analytic theories for two formulations of climate-state dependent diffusivity successfully capture the results of numerical EBM solutions. While existing GCM studies do not agree on the sign of simulated diffusivity changes with warming, they have never found enough diffusivity reduction to eliminate polar amplified warming. For reasonable choices of parameter values, the success of the new analytic theories reveals why."
2378	Evidential	"Understanding permafrost vulnerability and resilience to climate warming is critical for predicting impacts on northern communities and ecosystems. The thermal characteristics of near-surface permafrost are influenced by effects from overlying vegetation and snow cover, both of which are changing in northern environments. The association between vegetation and snow is important in the coastal mountains of Labrador, northeast Canada, because of high annual snowfall totals and greening tundra biomes. In this study, we present a series of one-dimensional simulations using the Northern Ecosystem Soil Temperature (NEST) model to characterize ground thermal conditions at two field sites (Nain, Nunatsiavut & Pinware, NunatuKavut) along the Labrador coast. NEST simulations covering 1979-2019 were run using ERA5 atmospheric reanalysis for three ecotypes (tundra, shrub, treed) with three different snow accumulation regimes (snow drifting away from site, no snow drift, snow drifting to site). At Nain, perennially frozen ground was present for all three ecotypes when snow cover was kept thin (drifting away) but was largely absent for the ecotypes when snow accumulation was higher. At Pinware, frozen ground was mostly absent except where snow cover was shallow (wind drifting away). For low-snow simulations, frozen bodies (< 20 m) persisted in all ecotypes during cold periods but only remained intact following warmer years for treed ecotypes. These results highlight the importance of spatial and temporal variability in snow cover on ground thermal regimes in coastal Labrador."
5377	Definitive	"Hydrological niche segregation (HNS), which refers to differences in root water uptake depth and physiological traits among coexisting species, remains poorly understood especially with respect to moisture changes and diverse water use strategies. This is particularly the case in regions with a seasonally dry climate where plants must constantly adapt to water stress. Over a 2-year period, we analyzed the isotopic compositions of xylem and soil water (_2H, _18O) and foliar _13C to identify the water sources and intrinsic water use efficiency (WUEi), respectively, of four coexisting plant species. These species include Populus simonii (a type of tree), Caragana korshinskii and Salix psammophila (both types of shrub), and Artemisia ordosica (a semi-shrub). This study was conducted in a semi-arid ecosystem in China’s Loess Plateau (CLP). To quantify HNS defined by _2H, _18O and _13C, we used a model called nicheROVER. Our results show that these four co-existing species had distinct position on a hydrological niche axis defined by their water sources and WUEi. P. simonii depended on deep soil water and demonstrated a high WUEi. Both shrubs, C. korshinskii and S. psammophila, utilized deep and intermediate soil water, respectively, and had comparable WUEi. The semi-shrub A. ordosica relied on shallow soil water and showed a low WUEi. These differences in water sources and WUEi led to HNS between A. ordosica and the other three species during the wet year. However, in a dry year, HNS reduced as the shrubs and semi-shrub increased their use of deep soil water and improved WUEi. Overall, these results demonstrate that HNS is a dynamic process that varies on at least an annual basis. It expands and contracts as plants regulate their water uptake and loss in response to changing soil moisture conditions."
4951	Evidential	"This study aims to derive and evaluate new empirical rainfall thresholds as the basis for landslide early warning in Progo Catchment, Indonesia, using high-resolution rainfall datasets. Although attempts have been made to determine such thresholds for regions in Indonesia, they used coarse-resolution data and fixed rainfall duration that might not reflect the characteristics of rainfall events that induced the landslides. Therefore, we evaluated gauge-adjusted Global Satellite Mapping of Precipitation (GSMaP-GNRT) and bias-corrected Climate Prediction Center morphing method (CMORPH-CRT) hourly rainfall estimates against measurements at rainfall stations. Based on this evaluation, a minimum rainfall of 0.2 mm/hour was used to identify rain events, in addition to a minimum of 24 hours of consecutive no-rain to separate two rainfall events. Rainfall thresholds were determined at various levels of non-exceedance probability, using accumulated and duration of rainfall events corresponding to  213 landslide occurrences from 2012 to 2021 compiled in this study. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis showed that thresholds based on rainfall station data, GSMaP-GNRT, and CMORPH-CRT resulted in Area Under ROC Curve (AUC) values of 0.72, 0.73, and 0.64, respectively. This result indicates that the performance of high-resolution satellite-derived data is comparable to that of ground observations in the Progo Catchment. However, GSMaP-GNRT outperformed CMORPH-CRT in discriminating the occurrence/non-occurrence of landslide-triggering rainfall events. For early warning purposes, the rainfall threshold is selected based on the probability exlevel at which the threshold maximizes the true skill score, i.e., at 10% if based on station data, or at 20% if based on GSMaP-GNRT."
7093	Definitive	"Ancient river deposits are important archives of past landscape conditions on planetary surfaces. On Earth, they host valuable groundwater, energy resources, and carbon-storage potential. Reconstructing details of paleochannel forms and movements refines our understanding of the controls on river behavior under different climate, landcover, and tectonic conditions, and improves predictions and models of subsurface reservoirs. While studies have shown detailed connections between channel kinematics and bar-deposit architecture in meandering river systems, similar connections between braided river movements and preserved braided river deposits have not been established. Here we explore the potential for connecting braided river deposits to paleochannel movements, form, and flow conditions, and we evaluate the controls on bar preservation using synthetic stratigraphy generated with a numerical morphodynamic model. We investigate how attributes of channel morphodynamics, like channel widening or braiding intensity, impact bar deposits’ preservation, scale, geometry, and architecture. We then assess how the scale, preservation, and facies composition of bar deposits reflect formative flow conditions of the channel. Our results demonstrate that no diagnostic signature of braided channel morphodynamics is recorded in bar-deposit geometry, facies, or preservation patterns. Rather, the unique local history of thread movements combines stochastically to preserve or rework bar deposits, and the timing of channel avulsion is the dominant control on bar preservation. Our results also show that representative paleochannel flow conditions will likely be accurately reflected in aggregate observations of braid bar deposits within channel-belt sandbodies at a regional or member/formation scale. These results demonstrate the need for broad sampling and statistical approaches to subsurface prediction and paleo-flow reconstruction in ancient, braided river deposits."
7264	Definitive	"Member of the Brule Formation of the White River Group at Toadstool Geologic Park in Nebraska. Our approach combined descriptive and quantitative methods to reconstruct river flow, sediment transport, channel dynamics, floodplain behavior, and catchment-scale moisture variability and ecosystem function. We found that rivers were ephemeral, with peak flow depths and widths of approximately 2.5 m and 65 m respectively. Median peak discharges were approximately 168 cms, and base flows near zero, as indicated by subaerial exposure surfaces on river beds. Floodplains were dynamic and built by frequent floods able to suspend and deposit sand up to 200 microns, with relatively short intervening periods of stasis for soil development. Environmental information recorded in n-alkane _D, _13C, average chain lengths (ACL) was similar and primarily inherited from transported plant material. The paleo-catchment relief, estimated from variability in _D values and modern altitude-driven lapse rates, was approximately 800 meters. River channels had a gradient of approximately 3 x 10-4, an order of magnitude less steep than modern rivers in the area. This difference is likely due to the eastward tilting of the Great Plains associated with dynamic topography that initiated during the Miocene. Modern river discharges are an order of magnitude lower and current mean annual precipitation is 100 - 220 mm less than during early Oligocene time; together, these estimates indicate greater moisture availability on early Oligocene landscapes relative to today, possibly due to lower paleo-landscape elevations at the time. Our study provides a detail-rich characterization of Early Oligocene landscapes in Nebraska, offering insights into the hydrology, morphology, paleo-elevation, and relief of rivers and catchments during this period. The coordinated approach we used integrates hydroclimatic reconstructions, river and floodplain dynamics, and sediment and water fluxes, thereby bridging the timescale gap between geological records and modern hydrological data and ensuring consistency in reconstructions across subdisciplines. Our approach can support improved predictive modeling of paired climate-river dynamics through time."
2455	Definitive	"Geologic evidence suggests drastic reorganizations of subtropical terrestrial hydroclimate during past warm intervals, including the mid-Piacenzian Warm Period (MP, 3.3 to 3.0 Ma). Despite having a similar to present-day atmospheric CO2 level (pCO2), MP featured moist subtropical conditions with high lake levels in Northern Africa, and mesic vegetation and sedimentary facies in subtropical Eurasia. Here, we demonstrate that major loss of the northern high-latitude ice sheets and continental greening, not the pCO2 forcing, are key to generating moist terrestrial conditions in subtropical Sahel and east Asia. In contrast to previous hypotheses, the moist conditions simulated in both regions are a product of enhanced tropospheric humidity and a stationary wave response to the surface warming pattern, both varying strongly in response to land cover changes. These results suggest that past terrestrial hydroclimate states were driven by Earth System Feedbacks, which may outweigh the direct effect of pCO2 forcing."
8570	Hypothetical	"There is a growing concern about the unforeseen negative consequences of climate change. In response, important scholarly efforts have produced valuable frameworks to help decisionmakers construct adaptation plans. Drawing on the success and failures of current adaptation plans, these frameworks have been developed to prevent maladaptations, meaning the unforeseen negative consequences of adaptation plans. We argue that while current frameworks focusing on planning and risk management are crucial, the inherent uncertainty of climate change requires a more nuanced approach. We propose a novel ""adaptation grid"" that aligns existing frameworks with Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty (DMDU). This grid leverages insights from current frameworks to structure different kinds of uncertainty and how they impact adaptation planning. Our approach recognizes that adaptation strategies lie on a continuum of success and failure. We advocate for indicators that go beyond success measurement, instead focusing on acceptable degrees of failure, learning from past actions, and identifying early warning signals. By incorporating a richer understanding of uncertainty, DMDU offers a comprehensive cognitive, methodological and theoretical framework for constructing qualitative observations into measurable indicators, imagining alternative futures, and implementing a management-learning system to help us better navigate climate change uncertainties."
8349	Definitive	"Humans have transformed ecosystems through habitat modification, harvesting, species introduction, and climate change. Changes in species distribution and composition are often thought to induce biotic homogenization, defined as a decline in spatial beta diversity through time. However, it is unclear whether homogenization is common in ocean ecosystems and if changes in beta diversity exhibit linear or more complex dynamics. Here, we assessed patterns of homogenization or its converse (differentiation) across more than 175,000 samples of 2,006 demersal fish species from 34 regions spanning six decades and 20% of the planet’s continental shelf area. While ten regions (29%) recorded significant homogenization, eleven (32%) recorded significant differentiation. Non-monotonic temporal fluctuations in beta diversity occurred in 15 regions, highlighting complex dynamics missed by before-and-after snapshots that can drive spurious conclusions about trends in beta diversity. Fishing pressure and temperature helped explain variance in beta diversity across years and regions. However, the strength and direction of these effects differed by region. Here we showed that, despite intense anthropogenic impacts on the oceans, the majority of demersal marine fish communities do not follow the global homogenization paradigm common in other realms."
1162	Hypothetical	"The Ouarzazate Basin is the southern foreland basin to the High Atlas Mountains in Morocco.  The sedimentary fill records a sequence from the Eocene to Pleistocene that records the interplay between tectonics and climate. This study presents the first stable isotope and facies analyses of the Middle to Late Miocene Aït Ibrirn lacustrine Member (Aït Kandoula Formation).  These data test whether the basin was internally draining and enable the development of palaeoenvironmental models for the Middle to Late Miocene.  Five sedimentary facies of lacustrine and palustrine limestones are interbeddded with extensive sequences of palaeosols and fluvial sandstones and conglomerates, often associated with evaporite (gypsum) development.  These facies can be divided into two facies associations related to water depth and sub-aerial exposure within the basin. In the Serravalian and Tortonian shallow water successions dominate the stratigraphy, typical of underfilled foreland basin settings.  Furthermore, carbonate _18O and _13C isotopes from the sections show covariance confirming that these carbonates were deposited within a hydrologically closed basin.  However, late Tortonian to Messinian carbonates do not demonstrate the covariance typical of endorheic basins. Additionally, the facies association indicates the presence of deeper water lake systems demonstrating that the basin was externally draining at this time.  These results question the established view of tectonic stagnation in the Late Miocene and suggest that the Cenozoic sediments of the Ouarzazate Basin contain a rich and untapped record of climate change and tectonic evolution on the edge of the Sahara desert."
5699	Hypothetical	"An open question in the study of climate prediction is whether internal variability will continue to contribute to prediction skill in the coming decades, or whether predictable signals will be overwhelmed by rising temperatures driven by anthropogenic forcing. We design an interpretable neural network that can be decomposed to examine the relative contributions of external forcing and internal variability to future regional SST trend predictions in the near-term climate (2020-2050). We show that there is additional prediction skill to be garnered from internal variability in the Community Earth System Model version 2 Large Ensemble, even in a relatively high forcing future scenario. This predictability is especially apparent in the North Atlantic, North Pacific and Tropical Pacific Oceans as well as in the Southern Ocean. We further investigate how prediction skill covaries across the ocean and find three regions with distinct coherent prediction skill driven by internal variability. SST trend predictability is found to be associated with consistent patterns of interannual and decadal variability for the grid points within each region."
7673	Definitive	"Climate change is causing increasingly alarming global impacts, such as rising temperatures and more severe storms. Despite this, current multilateral initiatives and agreements to systematically reduce greenhouse gas emissions are completely incommensurate with the scale of the problem. Thus, we explore the potential that some unilateral actor, finding present and near-future climate changes intolerable, may seek to respond to these changes through its own deliberate intervention in the climate. Focusing specifically on stratospheric aerosol injection (SAI), which is the dispersal of reflective particles in the stratosphere to reflect some of the sun’s energy away from Earth, we seek to identify the characteristics of states that might be most likely to modify the climate without broad international consensus. We develop a framework of geopolitically-relevant conditions that progressively reduce the number of candidate states, with the aim of identifying plausible unilateral SAI initiators. These conditions consider the state’s capacity to deploy SAI, variability in states’ motivations to change their local climates, the confidence that a deployment could be sustained and might produce the intended effects, and the state’s insensitivity to global condemnation, should the international community disapprove of this action. We provide a detailed explanation of each of these conditions along with discussion of potential candidate states. Our results highlight a concentration of states meeting all or most of these conditions in the vicinity of the Arabian Sea. Based on this finding, we conclude with a discussion of how this type of geopolitical scenario development can be integrated into social-physical simulations of geopolitically plausible climate intervention scenarios."
3386	Exploratory	"Anticipated infrastructure growth and energy transition may exacerbate biodiversity loss through increased demand for mining products. This study uses an enhanced multi-regional input-output database (REX, Resolved EXIOBASE) and supply chain impact mapping (SCIM) method to assess global biodiversity loss associated with mining-related land use. We identify hotspots in the supply chain of mining products, compare the impact of fossil and renewable electricity, and estimate the share of mining in total global impacts. We found that half of the global mining-related biodiversity loss occurs in Indonesia, Australia and New Caledonia. Major international trade flows of embodied biodiversity loss involve Indonesia’s coal exports to China and India, New Caledonia’s nickel exports to Japan and Australia, and Australia’s iron and bauxite exports to China. Key end-consumers include China’s growing infrastructure and the EU’s and USA’s households-consumption. Electricity generation accounted for 10% of global mining-related biodiversity loss in 2014. The impact of coal-fired electricity was ten times higher than renewables per unit of electricity generated. Globally, mining contributes to less than 1% of total land-use related biodiversity loss, which is dominated by agriculture. Our results provide transparency in sourcing more sustainable mining products and underline synergies in fostering renewables to meet local biodiversity and global climate targets."
5319	Hypothetical	"Climate change and lack of freshwater are a concern for people living in the Andean highlands, altiplano of Bolivia. The objectives of this study were to establish a culturally appropriate research approach to study water governance and to identify key political actors and engagement processes related to water governance in Bolivia. A qualitative field study was conducted in the Department of La Paz, Bolivia, in July 2019. Any study of water management must look across multiple spatial scales and take into consideration the larger landscapes - infrastructural/technological and also ecological within which water management occurs. In the unique political and social context of Bolivia, particularly if one takes seriously the country’s commitment to giving voice to its indigenous people, the governance of water cannot be decoupled from a cultural, and also spiritual, conception of water as Mother; as well as Mother Earth. A current political transformation of public water policies draws from the cultural / spiritual paradigm of Vivir Bien which includes a hope and dream for the future in the present. Intercultural engagement reaches ancestral wisdom (Amawtika science) through indigenous traditional knowledge and then relates it to western knowledge to coexist in community. These findings can inform a respectful intercultural research and engagement process to address the climate crisis."
1708	Hypothetical	"This white paper summarizes the scientific importance of studying igneous compositions in meteorites, surface samples, and through orbital analyses to better constrain the geology of Mars as a whole and better understand the geological processes that have shaped Mars in the past and present. In support of martian igneous studies, we strongly advocate for the following in the upcoming decade: 1. To sustain funding for meteorite recovery in order to have continued access to martian samples; 2. To support the return of igneous samples from Jezero crater; 3. To support funding for detailed analyses of igneous rocks at the martian surface; 4. To support laboratories and collaborations between sample, remote-sensing, and mission scientists; 5. To support curation facilities needed for not only meteorite samples, but also Mars sample return. The study of martian igneous compositions is crucial to the entire planetary community as it will help us to resolve questions about the formation and evolution of planetary interiors, climate and atmospheres, as well as habitability throughout the entire solar system."
2778	Definitive	"In the last decades, developing countries have experienced an increase in impact of natural disasters due to both the ongoing climate change and the sustained expansion of urban areas. Intrinsic vulnerability of settlements due to poverty and poor governance, as well as the lack of tools for urban occupation planning and mitigation protocols, have made such impact particularly severe. Cuenca (Ecuador) is a significant example of a city that in the last decades has experienced considerable population growth and an associated increasing of loss due to landslide occurrence. Despite such effects, updated urban planning tools are absent, a condition that suggested an evaluation of multi-temporal relative landslide risk, here presented based on updated data depicting the spatial distribution of landslides and their predisposing factors, as well as population change between 2010 and 2020. In addition, a multi-temporal analysis accounting for risk change between 2010 and 2020 has been carried out. Due to the absence of spatially distributed data about the population, electricity supply contract data have been used as a proxy of the population. Results indicate that current higher relative risk is estimated for municipalities (parroquias) located at the southern sector of the study area (i.e. Turi, Valle, Santa Ana, Tarqui and Paccha). Moreover, the multi-temporal analysis indicates that most municipalities of the city located in the hilly areas that bound the center (i.e. Sayausi, San Joaquin, Tarqui, Valle, Sidcay, Banos, Sidcay, Ricaurte, Paccha and Chiquintad), experiencing sustained population growth, will be exposed to an increased risk with a consistently growing trend. This information is consistent with landslide susceptibility data derived by a machine learning-based analysis that indicate higher susceptibility to landslides in hilly areas surrounding the city center. The obtained relative risk maps can be considered as a useful tool for guiding land-planning, occupation restriction and early warning strategy adoption. The used methodological approach, accounting for landslide susceptibility and population variation through proxy data analysis, has the potential to be applied in a similar context of growing-population cities of low to mid-income countries, where data, usually needed for a comprehensive landslide risk analysis, are only partly available."
8356	Hypothetical	"This paper builds on a model of individual and collective climate action on the neighbourhood level recently presented by Klöckner et al. [1]. In this model, types of local climate action were empirically categorized (diet, travel, protest, other climate actions) and it was found that both individual and collective intentions contribute to self-reported climate actions in these categories and that collective intentions were weaker than individual. Based on these findings, the current paper presents the results of an intervention study where a series of neighbourhood events in the same neighbourhoods as used for Klöckner et al. were implemented over the course of 9 months, aiming at strengthening the collective motivation to act against climate change in the neighbourhoods. These events comprised of hands-on work on contextualized climate action, experiential learning, and creative and disruptive communication techniques. The effects of these interventions were evaluated in seven European neighbourhoods with replicating key elements of the pre-intervention survey after the intervention series. In total, 46 respondents answered the survey both before and after the interventions, 13 of which were participants of at least one of the intervention events. Despite the small sample size, we find indications that the interventions were successful in increasing the perceived social norms in the neighbourhoods, the identification with the neighbourhoods, and decreasing perceived barriers to action. Smaller positive effects seem to occur for collective intentions and collective efficacy, and behaviour change. The individual factors appear to be mostly unaffected by the interventions, with potentially some improvement in individual efficacy. Overall, this study – while being partly inconclusive due to small sample size – points at the potential of neighbourhood-based climate interventions as a new methodology for activating a path to climate action underutilized in current campaigns. The preliminary findings we present here help generating studies to test them under more robust conditions."
6818	Exploratory	"In the US, local governments are increasingly crucial in driving climate action. Drawing upon Tang et al. (2010) and Baker et al. (2012), this study assesses nine local climate action plans in the state of Michigan. It introduces a comprehensive framework, integrating climate resilience and environmental justice (EJ) indicators to evaluate plan content. Despite recognizing global climate concerns, qualitative content analysis shows that plans lack localized analyses and actions, hampering planning due to insufficient data, minimal coordination, limited funds, and finite policy options. Key aspects like equitable resource distribution, environmental burdens, and community engagement are often overlooked. Without addressing these, local governments lack the tools to effectively implement just and climate-oriented policies."
3503	Exploratory	"Sea ice dynamics exhibit granular behavior as individual floes and fracture networks become particularly evident at length scales O(10--100) km and smaller. However, climate models do not resolve floes and represent sea ice as a continuum, while existing floe-scale sea ice models tend to oversimplify floes using discrete elements of predefined simple shapes. The idealized nature of climate and discrete element sea ice models presents a challenge of comparing the model output with floe-scale sea ice observations. Here we present SubZero, a conceptually new sea ice model geared to explicitly simulate the life cycles of individual floes by using complex discrete elements with time-evolving shapes. This unique model uses parameterizations of floe-scale processes, such as collisions, fractures, ridging, and welding, to simulate a wide range of evolving floe shapes and sizes. We demonstrate the novel capabilities of the SubZero model in idealized experiments, including uniaxial compression, the summer-time sea ice flow through the Nares Strait, and winter-time sea ice growth. The model naturally reproduces the statistical behavior of the observed sea ice, such as the power-law appearance of the floe size distribution and the long-tailed ice thickness distribution. The SubZero model could provide a valuable alternative to existing discrete element and continuous sea ice models for simulations of floe interactions."
1863	Hypothetical	"Resilience is widely seen as an important attribute of coastal systems and, as a concept, is increasingly prominent in policy documents. However, there are conflicting ideas on what constitutes resilience and its operationalisation as an overarching principle of coastal management remains limited. In this paper, we show how resilience to coastal flood and erosion hazard could be measured and applied within policy processes, using England as a case study. We define resilience pragmatically, in economic, environmental and social terms, integrating what is presently a disparate set of policy objectives for coastal areas. Our definition includes several dimensions of resilience and we develop a set of composite indicators for each of these, grounded empirically with reference to national geospatial datasets. A prototype model has been developed, which generates a quantitative resilience index for a given geographical unit (England’s coastal hazard zone being represented at a high spatial resolution, about 8,000 areal units). A range of different stakeholder perspectives are captured using relative indicator weightings. The illustrative results presented here demonstrate the practicality of formalising and quantifying resilience, and the insights obtained mainly concern this process of operationalisation. To re-focus national policy around the stated desire of enhancing resilience to coastal flooding and erosion would require firm commitment from government to develop an approach to monitor progress towards resilience, extending the present risk-based approach. This requires a consensus methodology in which stakeholder values are explicitly considered, and also requires incentives for coastal managers to engage with and apply this new approach. Such a transition would challenge existing governance arrangements at national and local levels, requiring more integration and inter-agency cooperation. However, it could provide a robust evidence-based framework for achieving more sustainable, equitable and societally acceptable adaptive responses to climate change at the coast."
5045	Evidential	"Low-salinity meltwater from Arctic sea ice and its snow cover accumulates and creates under-ice meltwater layers below sea ice. These meltwater layers can result in the formation of new ice layers, or false bottoms, at the interface of this low-salinity meltwater and colder seawater. As part of the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of the Arctic Climate (MOSAiC), we used a combination of sea ice coring, temperature profiles from thermistor strings and underwater multibeam sonar surveys with a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) to study the areal coverage and temporal evolution of under-ice meltwater layers and false bottoms during the summer melt season from mid-June until late July. ROV surveys indicated that the areal coverage of false bottoms for a part of the MOSAiC Central Observatory (350 by 200 m2) was 21%. Presence of false bottoms reduced bottom ice melt by 7‚Äì8% due to the local decrease in the ocean heat flux, which can be described by a thermodynamic model. Under-ice meltwater layer thickness was larger below first-year ice and thinner below thicker second-year ice. We also found that thick ice and ridge keels confined the areas in which under-ice meltwater accumulated, preventing its mixing with underlying seawater. While a thermodynamic model could reproduce false bottom growth and melt, it could not describe the observed bottom melt rates of the ice above false bottoms. We also show that the evolution of under-ice meltwater-layer salinity below first-year ice is linked to brine flushing from the above sea ice and accumulating in the meltwater layer above the false bottom. The results of this study aid in estimating the contribution of under-ice meltwater layers and false bottoms to the mass balance and salt budget for Arctic summer sea ice."
5645	Exploratory	"Data from some climate model simulations is in a 360 days per year format, that is, every month is 30 days long. The main reason for this is analytical convenience in creating seasonal, annual and multi-annual means which are an integral part of climate model development and evaluation. This work illustrates a method to convert daily-mean, 360-day calendar climate model data into 'real', Gregorian calendar format. The method includes randomisation of the interpolation dates to avoid spurious artefacts in the output data, support for leap years and the ability to be run in in parallel so that multiple variables and years can be processed simultaneously. Future work to generalise this software to allow for sub-daily output frequency is encouraged and it is hoped that this work facilitates easier inter-model comparisons and knowledge transfer."
4554	Evidential	"Wildfire in Siberia is of paramount importance in the carbon cycle and climate change as it is a major disturbance in the pan-Arctic ecosystems. In recent decades, the Siberian wildfire regime has been changing; however, less is known about the key climatic drivers and the underlying feedback over these vulnerable fire-prone landscapes. Here, based on ground-based and satellite observations and meteorological reanalysis data during the past two decades (2002–2021), we find that central Siberia features the most prominent wildfire escalation and poleward expansion. Such a shift in wildfires is closely related to drying soil moisture under a fast-warming Arctic. Our results show that a warming air temperature and weakened meridional moisture flux substantially suppress precipitation and are responsible for an increasing hydrological drought in central Siberia. We also reveal an unexpected self-amplifying feedback induced by smoke aerosol via modifying cloud microphysical properties, which further compounds wildfires in Siberia. As the Arctic warming is projected to continue, wildfires in this region are estimated to be in-tensified by 200–350% by the end of this century. This work identifies main climate drivers and feedback mechanism for the escalating wildfire risk in Siberia since the onset of this century, highlighting the importance of risk management and fire-climate adaptation in this region."
5785	Evidential	"Background: Climatic changes are threatening rural livelihoods in East Africa. Evidence suggests that climate change adaptation in this context might reproduce inequitable intra-household gender relations and that adaptation may be more effective when women are involved in meaningful ways. Hence, a nuanced understanding of the gendered nature of intra-household adaptation decision-making is essential for gender-responsive research, policy-making and practice. Objective: This qualitative systematic review aimed to investigate how gender relations influence decision-making concerning climate change adaptation in rural East African households and how decisions about climate change adaptation influence intra-household gender dynamics, in turn. Methods: Applying qualitative meta-synthesis principles, systematic searches were conducted in 8 databases and supplemented with comprehensive hand searches. 3,662 unique hits were screened using predetermined inclusion criteria, leading to a final sample of 21 papers. Relevant findings of these studies were synthesised using inductive thematic coding, memoing and thematic analysis. Results: While men tended to be the primary decision-makers, women exercised some decision-making power in traditionally female domains and in female-headed households. Women’s and men’s roles in intra-household adaptation decision-making appeared to be influenced by a plethora of interconnected factors, including gender norms, gendered divisions of labour and access, ownership and control over resources. Intra-household adaptation seemed to impact the dynamics between male and female household members. The pathways of this influence were complex, and the ultimate outcomes for men and women remained unclear. Discussion: We discuss our findings with reference to theoretical literature on gender-transformative approaches in development and adaptation and previous research concerning the gendered nature of CCA in East Africa. We then discuss implications for gender-responsive adaptation interventions."
2231	Evidential	"Submarine canyons incise continental shelves and slopes, and are important conduits for the transport of sediment, nutrients, organic carbon and pollutants from continents to oceans. Submarine canyons bear morphological similarities to subaerial valleys, such as their longitudinal (long) profiles. Long profiles record the interaction between erosion and uplift, making their shape, or concavity, a record of environmental and tectonic processes. The processes that govern concavity of subaerial valleys and rivers are well documented on a global scale, however, the processes that control submarine canyon concavity are less well constrained. We address this problem by utilizing existing geomorphological, tectonic and climatic datasets to measure the long profiles and quantify the concavities of 377 modern submarine canyons. Key results show that: (1) the dominant control on submarine canyon concavity is tectonics, with forearcs and tectonically active margins hosting the least concave-up profiles; (2) present-day canyon position affects canyon concavity, with river-associated canyons being less concave than canyons currently dissociated from rivers on forearcs; (3) present-day onshore climate appears to have a more limited impact on submarine canyon concavity when compared to these factors. While significant local variation exists, these results indicate that tectonic processes are the dominant control on the concavity of submarine canyons on a global scale."
8405	Evidential	"Climate change poses a significant risk to Ireland’s economy, society and environment, and therefore it is imperative that planners and policymakers are adequately informed about future climate change so that appropriate mitigation and adaptation measures can be implemented. The main objective of this project was to evaluate the effects of climate change on the future climate of Ireland using high-resolution regional climate modelling. Previous regional climate projection research for Ireland shows large uncertainty for certain climate projections such as precipitation. Since extreme events such as flooding and droughts are likely to be a critical issue for Ireland, it is important to address this research gap. The project simulated the future climate (up to the year 2100) at high resolution (4 km grid spacing) using the most up-to-date regional climate models, Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) Earth system models and new shared socioeconomic pathway and representative concentration pathway (SSP-RCP) (SSP1-2.6, SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5) emission scenarios. The scenario-based projections are supplemented with global warming threshold scenario projections for temperature and precipitation.  Below are examples of climate projections that are of particular interest to policymakers: • Near-surface temperature is projected to increase by 0.5–0.7°C for SSP1-2.6 (2021–2050) and 2.4–3.0°C for SSP5-8.5 (2071–2100), with the largest increases in the east.  • Warming is enhanced for the extremes, resulting in substantial projected increases in heatwaves and decreases in frost and ice days. • The future autumn and winter months are projected to be wetter (increases of up to 10% for SSP5-8.5, 2071 2100), while summer is projected to be drier (decreases of 8% for SSP5-8.5, 2071–2100). • The precipitation climate is projected to become more variable, with substantial projected increases in both dry periods and heavy rainfall events. Snowfall is projected to decrease by between 31% (SSP1 2.6, 2021–2050) and 84% (SSP5-8.5, 2071–2100). • The projections indicate an average increase in the length of the growing and grazing seasons, soil temperature, crop heat units and growing degree days for a range of crops.  • The energy content of the 120 m wind is projected to decrease for all seasons, with the largest decreases noted for the summer months (reductions of 23% for SSP5-8.5, 2071–2100).  • Photovoltaic power is projected to decrease for all seasons, with decreases enhanced for the winter and summer months. • The projections show that over the coming decades there will be a substantial reduction in the requirement for heating in Ireland.  This research provides Ireland with a data resource to explore its future climate and enables the assessment of the scale of impacts across sectors, at regional and local levels. This report provides an outline of the regional climate modelling undertaken to assess the impacts of climate change in Ireland, based on a number of future scenarios, and highlights the key findings. The project has also provided a large database that can be interrogated for various meteorological parameters, which is essential for detailed analysis across a diverse range of sectoral concerns. The national climate projections of the current report are in broad agreement with previous research, which adds a measure of confidence to the projections. The research improves on previous research by simulating the future climate at a higher spatial resolution (4 km) using the most up-to-date regional climate models to downscale an ensemble of CMIP6 global datasets under the new SSP-RCP emission scenarios. The increased ensemble size of projections allows for a more accurate quantification of climate change uncertainty. Furthermore, the current report provides projections for additional climate variables and derived metrics that are critically important to biodiversity and to key Irish sectors, including agriculture, health, energy and transport.  A second component of the project involved simulating global climate change using the EC-Earth ESM. These EC-Earth simulations constituted Ireland’s contribution to CMIP6, and their results informed the IPCC Assessment Report (AR) 6 Working Group 1 report."
8023	Exploratory	"The Interagency Working Group on Ocean Acidification monitoring Prioritization Plan 2024 calls for Coastal Acidification Networks to identify the ocean and coastal acidification (OCA) monitoring needs most important for their regions. The Northeast Coastal Acidification Network (NECAN) organized a webinar series to study regional needs, which culminated with a workshop in November 2023. This workshop led to the identification of six priority new Monitoring Needs in addition to the maintenance of current monitoring efforts: -Improve spatial and temporal scale of monitoring co-located OCA variables and biological measurements to better resolve variability of acidification dynamics in concert with biological processes -Increase subsurface monitoring to understand how conditions vary at depth -Increase the number of high-frequency monitoring assets that measure at least two of four carbon parameters -Increase near-real-time and rapid response observing capacity to capture episodic events -Determine fluxes and rates that would help parameterize and constrain regional modeling efforts to understand past conditions and project future trends -Increase spatial coverage of “climate”-quality observations This report presents monitoring needs and opportunities for consideration by coastal managers, decision makers, researchers, and monitoring groups. It offers options to apply new capacity or funding to the expansion of OCA monitoring in the NECAN region. Writing the report led to the identification of a number of cross-cutting actions which will lead to the implementation of these Monitoring Needs: _ Expand monitoring beyond carbonate chemistry to provide a complete assessment of OCA, its effects, and future trends. _ Enhance or leverage existing monitoring platforms for a cost-effective and collaborative approach to creating a more complete OCA monitoring system in the NECAN region. _ Expand the NECAN membership to include protected area experts, terrestrial biogeochemists and hydrologists, fisheries experts, social scientists, Tribal liaisons, project leads from large assessments, and other important stakeholders, rights holders and decision makers. _ Increase funding in the Northeast to both sustain currently-stretched efforts and grow a more robust ocean acidification monitoring program. _ Pursue immediate implementation of proxy approaches or interim strategies for measurements with technological or capacity limitations, while new technologies are being developed. _ Synthesize monitoring information to advance the collective understanding of OCA in the NECAN region. _ Deploy monitoring assets strategically, with end-user needs in mind, ensuring that the collected data is accessible, relevant, and useful for decision-making. _ Share NECAN’s experience in developing these recommendations with other regional CANs."
6971	Exploratory	"Alluvial forests are fragile and sensitive to drought induced by climate change and exacerbated by altered flow regimes. Our ability to detect and map their sensitivity to drought is therefore crucial to evaluate the effects of climate change and adjust management practices. In such a context, we explore the potential of multi-scale thermal infrared imagery (TIR) to diagnose the sensitivity of alluvial forests to drought events. In summer 2022, we sampled leaves and phloem on Populus nigra trees from two sites with contrasted hydrological connectivity along the Ain River (France) in order to investigate the seasonality of water stress and act as ground truth for airborne TIR images. To map forest sensitivity to drought, we then used a set of TIR data from four existing airborne campaigns and Landsat archives over a larger spatial and temporal extent. Field data showed that stress conditions were reached for both sites during summer but were higher in the site with lower groundwater connectivity, which was also the case for individual tree crown temperature. At the forest plot scale, canopy temperature was linked to forest connectivity for two of four airborne TIR campaigns, with higher values in the more degraded reaches. The data from the Landsat archives at the landscape scale was used to locate the areas of the riparian forest impacted by a historical drought event, and monitor their recovery. TIR data showed promising results to help detect and map tree water stress in riparian environments. However, stress is not detected in all TIR campaigns, demonstrating that in-field ecophysiological measurements are complementary to validate observations and one-shot acquisitions are not enough to diagnose stress. More integrative indicators of drought stress are needed at a seasonal scale, one-shot acquisitions on a given day can inform potential heat disturbance effects but do not really give information on the cumulative effects of heat pulses over the whole vegetative season (ramp-disturbance effect). Landsat data was useful to identify trends but may be less representative of stress due to coarse spatial resolution and potential confounding factors related to changes in successional stages (tree height and density...) at larger temporal scales."
1731	Evidential	"Deep water formation is not only the driver of the global ocean circulation; by sending heat and carbon to the deep ocean, it is also crucial for climate change mitigation. Yet its future is uncertain: will it slow down as stratification increases, emerge in polar regions as the wind starts blowing over previously ice-covered waters, or intensify with increased evaporation? Here we present the first global study of the evolution of deep water formation as atmospheric CO2 concentration increases, using the latest generation of Earth System models (CMIP6). We show that open ocean deep convection stops globally shortly before 600 ppm, mostly in response to increased stratification, but that deep water formation continues under a different regime. Deep convection does not emerge in ice-freed regions. The mechanism is self-reinforcing, as less mixing also increases stratification and modifies heat fluxes, with most oceanic regions gaining even more heat."
2444	Evidential	"While climate change mitigation targets necessarily concern maximum mean state changes, understanding impacts and developing adaptation strategies will be largely contingent on how climate variability responds to increasing anthropogenic perturbations. Here we present a new 100-member large ensemble of climate change projections conducted with the Community Earth System Model version 2 to examine the sensitivity of internal climate fluctuations to greenhouse warming. Our unprecedented simulations reveal that changes in variability, considered broadly in terms of probability distribution, amplitude, frequency, phasing, and patterns, are ubiquitous and span a wide range of physical and ecosystem variables across many spatial and temporal scales. Greenhouse warming will in particular alter variance spectra of Earth system variables that are characterized by non-Gaussian probability distributions, such as rainfall, primary production or fire occurrence. Our modeling results have important implications for climate adaptation efforts, resource management, and for seasonal predictions."
6884	Evidential	"Future tropical cyclone risks will evolve due to climate change and socio-economic development, entailing substantial uncertainties. An uncertainty and sensitivity analysis of these risks is thus vital, yet outcomes are influenced by the chosen model setup. This study investigates how much future tropical cyclone risks are driven by climate and socio-economic changes; quantifies the uncertainty from propagating alternate representations of these systems through the entire risk modeling chain; and evaluates how strongly each model input contributes to output uncertainty. By comparing these three elements - drivers, uncertainty, and sensitivity - across four distinct TC models, we can derive findings that are generalizable beyond individual model setups. We find that average TC risk will increase 1-5% by 2050 globally, with maximum risk increases ranging from 10-400% by 2100, depending on hazard model choice and region, while the dominant source of uncertainty shifts with modeling choices. Finally, we differentiate between aleatory, epistemic, and normative uncertainties, offering guidance to reduce them and inform better decision-making."
1992	Definitive	"The 880 million agricultural workers of the world are especially vulnerable to increasing heat stress due to climate change, affecting the health of individuals and reducing labour productivity. In this study, we focus on rice harvests across Asia and estimate the future impact on labour productivity by considering changes in climate at the time of the annual harvest. During these specific times of the year, heat stress is often high compared to the rest of the year. Examining climate simulations of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 6 (CMIP6), we identified that labour productivity metrics for the rice harvest, based on local wet-bulb globe temperature, are strongly correlated with global mean near-surface air temperature in the long term (p<<0.01, R2>0.98 in all models). Limiting global warming to 1.5 °C rather than 2.0 °C prevents a clear reduction in labour capacity of 1% across all Asia and 2% across Southeast Asia, affecting the livelihoods of around 100 million people. Due to differences in mechanization between and within countries, we find that rice labour is especially vulnerable in Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh, and the Indian states of West Bengal and Kerala.  Our results highlight the regional disparities and importance in considering seasonal differences in the estimation of the effect of climate change on labour productivity and occupational heat-stress."
7750	Hypothetical	"Climate change has badly affected many countries in the world and Pakistan is being listed among the top ten of those countries. Pakistan is facing many adverse consequences due to climate change, which includes food security issues, water scarcity, temperature rise and high air pollution index. Moringa oleifera, known to be the miracle tree, has multiple advantages and can be used to combat global warming. The geographical suitability of sites for different plant species is diversified by temperature and precipitation variations. With the intention of forecasting the effects of climate change and the suitability of the land for growing M. oleifera in Pakistan, this study employed the MaxEnt Model which is based on the maximum entropy technique. Two Representatives Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5 will be used to predict highly suitable areas, moderately suitable areas and the areas which are least suitable for M.oleifera in the year 2070, from five General Circulation Models (GCM). The findings of this study reveal a boost in highly suitable areas of future distribution from 9% of the current distribution to 28.31% and 36.67% in RCP-4.5 and RCP-8.5 respectively. This shows that this tree can withstand adverse environmental conditions and it should be planted in abundant quantities everywhere, considering its multiple ecologi-cal and medicinal uses"
2252	Evidential	"Study region: Sio Malaba Malakisi river basin, East Africa.  Study Focus: Poor rain-gauge density is a limitation to comprehensive hydrological studies in Sub-Saharan Africa. Consequently, Satellite precipitation products (SPPs) provide an alternative source of data for possible use in hydrological modelling. However, there is need to test their reliabilities across varied hydro-climatic and physiographic conditions to understand their applicability. In this study, we evaluated and compared the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM-3B42 v7), Climate Hazards Group Infrared Precipitation (CHIRPS v2.0), Multi-Source Weighted-Ensemble Precipitation (MSWEP v2.2), Precipitation Estimation from Remotely Sensed Information using Artificial Neural Networks-Climate Data Record (PERSIANN-CDR) and Tropical Applications of Meteorology using Satellite (TAMSAT) against gauge observations, for possible use in water allocation studies. Furthermore, the Continuous Semi-distributed Runoff (COSERO) model was adapted using the SPPs and applied to generate discharges, which were cross-compared with observed discharges. New Hydrological Insights for the region: Our results indicate that the SPPs are able to detect seasonal rainfall patterns throughout the basin. At lower altitudes, the products overestimated rainfall events as indicated by the performance measures. The COSERO results indicate that PERSIANN-CDR and MSWEPv2.2 overcompensated and underestimated discharge throughout the basin. This could be attributed to differences in temporal dynamics of the products. In overall, seasonal trends captured by the SPPs can be used to support catchment management efforts in data scarce regions."
2566	Hypothetical	"Story-based futures serve an important role in climate change scenario development. Stories are particularly useful in exploring sea level rise possibilities, since we know many coastal areas are specifically vulnerable to accelerating rises in sea level. This discrete change in coastline is different from most other climate change impacts, and offers a clear basis for scientifically-informed, future scenarios. We demonstrate this with a creative world-building effort set in Lagos, Nigeria, in the year 2199. Further, we employ story-based scenario development, and create a learning-oriented, web-based game that allows users to experience stories in an open-ended, text-based adventure style. This collaborative process blended scientific research, story-telling, and artistic co-creation to iteratively construct the game ‚ÄòLagos2199‚Äô. The first use-case of Lagos2199 is documented herein, with corresponding survey results from the student users. This work has three core conclusions. First, the unique reality that sea level rise will literally re-draw maps can be leveraged as an entry-point for world-building and scenario development of the future. Second, such a scenario can be blended with storytelling, art, and music to create a multi-dimensional, immersive exploration of ecological and social change. Third, this kind of game experience can serve an important pedagogical role in climate change education. Providing the next generation of citizens with fluency in both climate change impacts and how society will interact with such impacts, is critical for providing adaptive capacity over the coming decades and centuries of accelerating global change."
2680	Evidential	"There have been many extreme fire seasons in Maritime Southeast Asia (MSEA) over the last two decades, a trend which will likely continue or accelerate due to climate change. Fires, in turn, are a major driver of atmospheric carbon monoxide (CO) variability, especially in the Southern Hemisphere. Here we attempt to maximize the amount of CO variability that can be explained via human-interpretable statistical models that use only climate mode indices as predictor variables. We expand upon previous work through the complexity at which we study the connections between climate mode indices and atmospheric CO (a proxy for fire intensity). Specifically, we present three modeling advancements. First, we analyze five different climate modes at a weekly timescale, which increases explained variability by 15% over models on a monthly timescale. Second, we accommodate multiple lead times for each climate mode index, finding that some indices have very different effects on CO at different lead times. Finally, we model the interactions between climate mode indices at weekly timescales, which provides a framework for studying these interactions at a higher level of complexity than previous work. Furthermore, we perform a stability analysis and show that our model for the MSEA region is robust, which adds weight to the scientific interpretation of the selected model terms. We believe that the complex relationships quantified here will be useful for scientists studying modes of variability in MSEA and for forecasters looking to maximize the information they glean from climate modes."
1927	Exploratory	"Adapting to sea level rise, climate change, and associated effects is especially challenging in sensitive small-island environments where false adaptation can lead to adverse impacts on natural and societal dynamics. Framing and interest play a decisive role for the successful implementation of any adaptation measures. An interdisciplinary perspective on the interaction of natural dynamics, societal demands, and political decisions is crucial. This study scrutinizes the coastal processes and socio-political dimensions of erosion on the reef island Fuvahmulah, the Maldives. The national government and Fuvahmulah's population have opposed perception and attribution about the cause and effect of the retreating shoreline. To review these perceptions and determine the drivers and processes behind Fuvahmulah's most pressing coastal issue, natural dynamics are recreated with process-based numerical methods and discussed regarding the present and projected sea levels and wave climate. The numerical results are based on high resolution digital elevation models from airborne imagery and in-situ bathymetric measurements. Interviews with national and local actors in coastal development and population surveys complement the physical insights into erosion on the island and scrutinize the socio-political dimension of climate change adaptation on small islands. The results of the interdisciplinary approach demonstrate how small-islands' adaptive capacities are typically impaired in dealing with climate-related changes, they reveal the structural challenges of top-down processes, and disclose the potential of local knowledge to overcome maldevelopment."
3524	Hypothetical	"Addressing the environmental crisis requires a substantial change of our current lifestyle. Yet, in media coverage and political communication, climate change has taken the lead over other aspects such as biodiversity loss and one may sometimes get the impression that reducing greenhouse gas emissions is fighting the root cause itself. The atmosphere, however, does not respond linearly to our reduction efforts and a certain temperature lock in above preindustrial levels is unavoidable. Because of the lack of an obvious direct benefit in the short term, public support for mitigation measures may diminish rapidly. Accordingly, focusing communication on the need for greenhouse gas reduction may eventually not be useful to induce sustainability transformation of society. We thus argue that there is a need to emphasize climate change mitigation as part of a more holistic practice of nature conservation and environmental protection, rather than an end in itself."
8161	Evidential	"Climate change is expected to increase the risks associated with vector-borne diseases, and its implications for human health are already observed across Canada. The objective of this review was to investigate the recommended adaptation strategies related to the risks associated with vector-borne diseases and examine how various levels of government in Canada are executing these recommended actions in their climate change adaptation plans. A combined methodology was employed, consisting of two distinct searches to examine both the recommended adaptation strategies in the peer-reviewed literature and the adaptation actions from governmental sources in the grey literature. Relevant sources were identified across four databases (Embase, Medline, Scopus, Global Health), as well as national, subnational, and municipal governmental websites across Canada. Data were categorized into eight (8) specific adaptation categories based on previously established frameworks. Data were also collected on which vector-borne diseases were referenced, the vulnerable population groups considered, and the inclusion of a One Health focus. A total of 194 peer-reviewed articles and 87 grey literature sources were reviewed, which contained a total of 582 adaptation recommendations and 178 adaptation actions. The most frequently proposed adaptation strategies related to the following categories: Management, Planning, and Policy, Information and Research, and Warning and Observation Systems. Our findings revealed a strong alignment between the recommended strategies and the adaptation measures being implemented. However, notable discrepancies were present among the adaptation categories of Practice and Behaviour and Laboratory Methods and Other Tools, revealing gaps across the literature and potential opportunities for further action. While many recommended strategies are being incorporated into actions across Canada, significant regional variability and gaps remain. We advocate for an increased investment in adaptation measures targeting vector-borne diseases and a greater integration of the One Health approach in subnational and municipal plans."
8268	Evidential	"The greenhouse effect is the warming of the earth's surface due to the presence of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. It is said to be 33 ¬∞C, but we cannot measure this value because we cannot create the state ‚Äúwithout greenhouse gases‚Äù. We therefore have to rely on calculations, although these are controversial. In the climate debate, this lack of measurements is often denoted as a major shortcoming. As a remedy, a novel model is proposed here, which proves the fundamental existence of the greenhouse effect beyond doubt, and which makes it possible to determine its real size from well-known measurements. Additionally, this model makes it possible to reject some other arguments against the greenhouse effect in a better way, such as an alleged contradiction to the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics, or an allegedly far too low concentration of greenhouse gases. This model consists of a row of bodies, the first one heated, the last one cooled, those between freely adjusting their temperatures. When an additional body is inserted into that row, a temperature spread develops in it, so that the body before the new one must warm up by half of this spread and that behind it must cool down accordingly. Applied to the earth, the temperature of the earth‚Äôs surface is warmer with greenhouse gases in the atmosphere than without by half of the temperature spread in the atmosphere. This value is well-known and confirms the 33 ¬∞C cited above for the ‚Äúnatural greenhouse effect‚Äù surprisingly well. The weakness of the model is that it is too coarse to make a statement about the increase of the greenhouse effect when the CO2 concentration is enhanced (‚Äúadditional greenhouse effect‚Äù). Lessons learned, limits, related problems, and open questions are discussed."
5279	Hypothetical	"A new and detailed climate classification based on K√∂ppen-Geiger and Trewartha schemes is proposed, which uses four components (thermal zone, continentality, humidity, and seasonal distribution of precipitation) to determine a location‚Äôs climate type. It specifies thermal zones into nine types by subdividing tropical, subtropical, temperate, and polar zones, which are based on original Trewartha classification. Continentality classification (continental, oceanic, and transitional) is based on modified Ivanov‚Äôs equation considering diurnal and annual temperature range. Humidity zone is based on the smoothed formula of K√∂ppen‚Äôs approach, and this classification adds a ‚Äòsemi-humid‚Äô zone to distinguish dry and wet forest climate zones. Monsoonal and Mediterranean climate are specified by seasonal distribution of precipitation. This study explores climate types in major global cities, and found that there are 82 different climate types among them. Cities tend to be in areas with mild to warm thermal conditions, oceanic climate (low annual and diurnal temperature ranges), high precipitation, and uniform seasonal distribution of precipitation, with the climate type C1oaf (warm-temperate oceanic humid climate with uniform precipitation) most common among global cities. Cities in subpolar and polar climate zones are extremely rare. An important improvement of this classification compared to K√∂ppen and Trewartha climate schemes is its inclusion of arid and semi-arid climate zone into thermal zones and seasonal distribution of precipitation types. Compared to Thornthwaite and Holdridge climate classifications, the classification only uses temperature and precipitation instead of other meteorological elements, making data more accessible for mapping and research."
2682	Hypothetical	"In the context of tackling climate change in the eastern Mediterranean and Middle East, HRH Prince El-Hassan bin Talal has called for an integrated approach to human and natu-ral resources management that takes account of ‘the triangle of geography, geology and geophysics’. The lack of application of geoscientific knowledge to sustainable develop-ment issues is surprising given that advancing human progress lies at the roots of modern geoscience and aligns with the intellectual mindsets and technical skills that geoscientists are trained in. Applying this Earth science toolkit to the challenges of long-term sustaina-bility will require the global geoscience community to repurpose its principles and prac-tices, in particular: (1) better communicating what geoscientists know and do, and how that is socially useful; (2) reaching out to other disciplines more engaged in sustainability issues; and (3) re-designing Earth science education and training programmes to place sustainability and human wellbeing at the heart of a 21st century geoscientist’s profes-sional purpose."
3197	Exploratory	"The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, ~21.000 years before present) was a period with significantly lower global mean temperature, large Northern Hemisphere ice sheets, and low CO2 concentrations. Unlike other high-latitude areas, Siberia was not covered by a terrestrial ice sheet. Climate simulations with LGM boundary conditions show large inter-model differences especially in Northern Siberia, which impede a direct analysis of Siberian LGM climate from simulations. Thus, constraints from proxy data are needed.  Here, we reconstruct summer temperature and moisture availability from a network of Siberian pollen records using statistical transfer functions. The estimates are corrected for the lower CO2 concentrations during the LGM with an a posteriori method. Using a Bayesian framework, we combine the pollen-based reconstructions with climate simulations to obtain the first regional state estimate of LGM climate constrained by proxies from Central and Eastern Siberia. Our reconstruction shows higher summer temperature anomalies than most high-latitude areas and simulations. Reconstructed moisture availability is similar to present-day values, consistent with most simulations. Analyses of the simulations show that anomalous circulation patterns and reduced cloud cover contribute particularly to the relatively high summer temperatures, supporting previous studies based solely on climate simulations. Our data-constrained state estimate is well-suited for future analyses of Siberian LGM climate such as investigations of the reasons for the absence of a Siberian ice sheet during the LGM."
5663	Exploratory	"Study region The Edwards Aquifer Region is located in south-central Texas, United States.  Study focus The paper focuses on the development and implementation of a data-inspired heuristic drought identification scheme to (i) quantify the intensity, duration, and frequency of precipitation deficit- and high temperature-driven meteorological droughts (PMet- and TMet-droughts), and (ii) link their propagation to groundwater droughts (GW-droughts) using baseline hydroclimatic measures and prevailing drought conditions derived from historical climate data and regional mitigation strategies.  New hydrological insights for the region Based on the intensity, duration, and timing of PMet- and TMet-droughts in the semi-arid karstic region, we identified three distinct GW-droughts, including persistence-driven, preconditions-driven, and intensity-driven droughts. The analysis revealed that successive heavy precipitation events are needed to end GW-droughts in the region. The scheme also identified TMet-droughts with the longest dry spells, TMet- and PMet-droughts with the highest intensity, and GW-drought with the second-highest intensity on record all occurred over the past 15 years. These findings provide evidence for a warming climate, intensified meteorological droughts, and increasing stress on the aquifer. Among the artificial intelligence models used, Extremely Randomized Trees (ERT) predicted time series of intensity & duration of GWdroughts from hydroclimatic features with high accuracy. Moreover, the ERT classifier revealed that the duration of PMet droughts and the intensity of TMet droughts are the topmost decisive features in predicting GW-drought intensity in the region."
5066	Exploratory	"Majapahit was the largest Hindu-Buddhist empire that ruled the Indonesian archipelago from the late 13th to mid-16th centuries CE. Only now there is still a lot of history surrounding the Majapahit era that has yet to be revealed. One is about how environmental factors influenced the political dynamics at that time. This study tries to discuss the influence of hydroclimate regimes using the Paleo Hydrodynamics Data Assimilation (PHYDA) product on the political history of Majapahit during the dry season, which occurs during the boreal summer. We conducted a spatial analysis of the area of drought by taking data from the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) in the Maritime Continent (MC) for six crucial episodes in the history of Majapahit, namely during the reign of Jayanegara (1309 - 1328 CE), which was marked by various political instability, the golden age of Majapahit (1309 - 1328 CE). 1350 - 1389 CE), the time of the Paregreg civil war (1405 - 1406 CE), the great famine event (ca. 1426 CE), the candrasengkala event (1478 CE), and in 1527 CE, which was marked by the complete conquest of Majapahit by the Demak sultanate. The results show statistically significant differences in most of these six episodes (except during the heyday of Majapahit) against the reference period, which is the average PDSI over the entire Majapahit era (1293 - 1527 CE). In addition, we also conducted a temporal analysis linking PDSI with shifts in the West Pacific Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (WP ITCZ) and El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) represented by Niño 3.4 Sea Surface Temperature (SST). This temporal analysis results show a positive correlation between WP ITCZ - PDSI, a negative correlation between Niño 3.4 SST - PDSI and a negative correlation between ITCZ - Niño 3.4 SST. All of these correlations are statistically significant. So the probable cause of dry/wet conditions in MC during the Majapahit era was triggered by a meridional ITCZ shift which triggered different ENSO phases through Bjerknes feedback. This preliminary study has implications as opening the way to understand the influence of environmental factors on political conditions in the Majapahit era in more detail."
1143	Hypothetical	"Rapid urban growth is increasing demand for potable groundwater. Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is a major control of groundwater potability and treatment costs. We hypothesize that climate change and urbanization will not only decrease groundwater availability, but also its quality. Here, we summarize global groundwater DOC data (n = 6781) to identify its drivers and predict future changes. Our analysis of 2916 data revealed climate, dissolved inorganic ions and land use explain 31% of DOC variability, whilst aquifer age accounted for an additional 16%. Urban groundwaters were ~19% more enriched in DOC than natural or agricultural lands. We identify hotspots in the United States associated with a groundwater DOC increase of 45% by 2050, which could increase household water costs in some key regions such as Nevada, Georgia and South Carolina. Climate change will make groundwater increasingly difficult and expensive to treat, requiring more efficient and cost-effective methods for groundwater treatment in the future."
1217	Hypothetical	"Recent observations indicate that many marine_terminating glaciers in Greenland and Antarctica are currently retreating and thinning, potentially due to long_term trends in climate forcing. In this study, we describe a simple two_stage model that accurately emulates the response to external forcing of marine_terminating glaciers simulated in a spatially extended model. The simplicity of the model permits derivation of analytical expressions describing the marine_terminating glacier response to forcing. We find that there are two time scales that characterize the stable glacier response to external forcing, a fast time scale of decades to centuries, and a slow time scale of millennia. These two time scales become unstable at different thresholds of bed slope, indicating that there are distinct slow and fast forms of the marine ice sheet instability. We derive simple expressions for the approximate magnitude and transient evolution of the stable glacier response to external forcing, which depend on the equilibrium glacier state and the strength of nonlinearity in forcing processes. The slow response rate of marine_terminating glaciers indicates that current changes at some glaciers are set to continue and accelerate in coming centuries in response to past climate forcing and that the current extent of change at these glaciers is likely a small fraction of the future committed change caused by past climate forcing. Finally, we find that changing the amplitude of natural fluctuations in some nonlinear forcing processes, such as ice shelf calving, changes the equilibrium glacier state."
3219	Evidential	"We undertook multiproxy analyses on two sediment cores from Lago Pato, a small lake basin at 51°S topographically separated from Lago del Toro in Torres del Paine (TdP), to provide insights into glacier dynamics and lake level change in the TdP and Última Esperanza region over the last ~30,000 cal a BP (30 ka). Lago Pato is situated in a region overridden by the Southern Patagonian Icefield during the Last Glacial and in a transitional climatic zone of Southern Patagonia sensitive to seasonal- to millennial-scale changes in the Southern Hemisphere Westerly winds (SWW). Results show that a deep ice dammed and enlarged palaeolake encompassed Lago del Toro and Lago Pato c. 30–20 ka, after ice had retreated from local-Last Glacial Maximum (l-LGM) limits at c. 48–34 ka, and during the build-up to the global-Last Glacial Maximum (g-LGM), c. 26–19 ka. Gaps in both sediment records between c. 20–13.4 ka and c. 20–10 ka suggest hiatuses in sediment accumulation during the g-LGM and Antarctic Cold Reversal (ACR) readvances and/or removal by lake lowering or flushing during the Late glacial–early Holocene. The palaeolake level dropped from >100 m a.s.l. to ~40–50 m a.s.l. towards the end of the ACR c. 13.4–13.0 ka, creating a shallower glaciolacustrine environment dammed by an ice tongue in the Estancia Puerto Consuelo–Última Esperanza fjord. Further lowering of the enlarged palaeolake level occurred when the ice thinned to <40 m a.s.l., eventually isolating Lago Pato from Lago del Toro and glaciogenic sediment input at c. 11.7 ka. After isolation, the ecology and water levels in Lago Pato became sensitive to regional climate shifts. The shallow, stable, and highly anoxic environment that developed after c. 11.7 ka is associated with weaker (or poleward shifted) SWW at 51°S and was replaced at c. 10 ka by an increasingly productive shallow-littoral lake with a variable lake-level and periodic shifts in anoxic-oxic bottom water conditions and ratios of benthic-planktonic diatoms. A more open Nothofagus forest, established at c. 8.6–7.5 ka, and more arid conditions c. 7.5–5.7 cal ka BP are linked to another phase of weaker (or poleward shifted) SWW at 51°S. More persistently wet conditions from c. 5.7 ka, with extensive closed Nothofagus forests and planktonic diatoms dominant, are associated with stronger (or equatorward shifted) SWW over 51°S. The abrupt return of benthic-to-tychoplanktonic diatoms after c. 3 ka reflects enhanced SWW at 51°S. Increasingly stable lacustrine and littoral wetland conditions established in the last ~500 years reflect weaker SWW and lasted until recent decades."
8494	Hypothetical	"Traditional climate change research has primarily focused on internal factors of Earth, particularly the impact of human activities on greenhouse gas emissions. This paper proposes the ""Mao's Theory of Global Climate and Ecosystem Change Based on Planetary Orbital Variations"", which suggests that changes in Earth's climate and ecosystems are primarily driven by the orbital variations of external celestial bodies. Earth's revolution around the Sun and its rotation determine seasonal transitions and day-night alternations, while climate evolution on other timescales is closely linked to changes in planetary orbital positions. The change in the planetary orbit position directly affects the Earth's temperature and atmospheric water vapor distribution, thereby governing the spatiotemporal evolution of ecosystems. The study finds that spatiotemporal variations in water vapor and temperature play a key role in global vegetation distribution and have a regulatory function on the greenhouse effect, partially offsetting the warming effects of carbon dioxide and demonstrating Earth's self-regulation capacity in response to temperature changes. Further analysis suggests that phenomena such as geomagnetic reversals, plate tectonics, and earthquakes are also related to the orbital variations of the Sun and other celestial bodies, with the emergence of life and biological evolution being active adaptations to orbital evolution and the Earth's internal spheres. Therefore, this theory offers new perspectives and methodologies for studying climate change and the spatiotemporal evolution of ecosystems, expanding new directions for climate prediction, disaster early warning, and species evolution research, and holds significant implications for future studies of climate and ecosystems."
3136	Hypothetical	"Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is contingent on managing complex interactions that create synergies and trade-offs between different goals. Given the importance of interactions, it is necessary to understand the system mechanisms underpinning them to provide insight into their non-linear behaviours such as side-effects, delay, and acceleration. Prominent methods of SDG analysis that focus on sector-specific modelling or data-driven statistical correlation are insufficient for presenting an integrated view of interactions among many goals. These methods are also often too technically complex or heavily data-driven to provide decision-makers with a simple practical tool and easily actionable and understandable results. To address this gap, we introduce a systems approach for analysing the SDGs that generalises a number of recurring interactions with unique structures and behaviours termed archetypes. We present eight interaction archetypes as thinking aids to conceptualise and analyse some of the important synergies and trade-offs, supported by several empirical studies related to the SDGs (e.g., poverty, food, well-being, water, energy, housing, climate, land-use). We also discuss how this approach can be operationalised in practice and what opportunities and challenges are ahead. Interaction archetype analysis advances sustainability science by giving researchers and policy-makers a diagnostic tool to identify fundamental mechanisms of barriers or policy resistance to SDG achievement, a comparative tool that can enhance knowledge transfer about the SDGs between different cases which share similar causal characteristics in a more coordinated way, and a prospective tool to design synergistic and transformational solutions for sustainable development."
8064	Evidential	"Lithium (Li) is essential for decarbonization strategies, such as electric vehicles and renewable energy storage, experiencing the largest growth rates among metals required for low-carbon technologies. To meet this demand, the raw materials sector must increase current capacities and develop new ones at untapped deposits. Understanding life cycle impacts is crucial to avoid severe environmental burden shifts in the future. Although site-specific life cycle inventories exist, they do not allow for a comprehensive global assessment of the Li sector, particularly in capturing technological developments. To address this, our study presents a life cycle inventory model for brines that maintains essential site-specific parameters while providing a global perspective. We define core parameters for site-specific modeling of Li carbonate (Li2CO3) production and develop a systematic approach to addressing data gaps. Our model employs a class-based structure for 30 mapped processes from the literature, and quantifies environmental and technical flows. Overall, we cover 25 sites, representing 300 kilotonnes (90 %) of current Li2CO3 production from brines and an additional 315 kilotonnes of potential future production. One key finding is that sites using direct Li extraction have 6-fold higher climate change impacts than sites using conventional technologies on average while water scarcity impacts are doubled on average. The difference is a result of the larger brine mass required to be treated due to lower Li grades. Furthermore, our model allows the implications for Li-ion battery production to be analysed. Based on our findings, we discuss decarbonization strategies for the Li sector to support a sustainable transition to a low-carbon society."
8375	Hypothetical	"The potential death toll of worst-case extreme heat events is crucial for climate risk analysis and adaptation planning. We estimate this quantity for Europe using machine learning to calculate the intensity of historical heat waves if they occur at present or future global temperatures, combined with empirical exposure-response functions to quantify the resulting mortality. Each event is projected to generate tens of thousands of excess deaths. For example, if July 1994 or August 2003 meteorological conditions recur at the current global temperature anomaly of 1.5 ¬∞C, we project 14,000 or 17,300 excess deaths across Europe in a single week, respectively. At 3 ¬∞C, mortality rises to 26,800 or 31,500 per week. These death rates are comparable to peak COVID-19 mortality in Europe and are not substantially reduced by ongoing climate adaptation. Our results suggest that avoiding mass heat mortality in Europe will require significant and novel adaptation to heat."
4864	Definitive	"Gridded high-resolution climate datasets are increasingly important for a wide range of modelling applications. Here we present PISCOt (v1.2), a novel high spatial resolution (0.01°) dataset of daily air temperature for entire Peru (1981-2020). The dataset development involves four main steps: i) quality control; ii) gap-filling; iii) homogenisation of weather stations, and iv) spatial interpolation using additional data, a revised calculation sequence and an enhanced version control. This improved methodological framework enables capturing complex spatial variability of maximum and minimum air temperature at a more accurate scale compared to other existing datasets (e.g. PISCOt v1.1, ERA5-Land, TerraClimate, CHIRTS). PISCOt performs well with mean absolute errors of 1.4 °C and 1.2 °C for maximum and minimum air temperature, respectively. For the first time, PISCOt v1.2 adequately captures complex climatology at high spatiotemporal resolution and therefore provides a substantial improvement for numerous applications at local-regional level. This is particularly useful in view of data scarcity and urgently needed model-based decision making for climate change, water balance and ecosystem assessment studies in Peru."
6672	Hypothetical	"Estuaries are subject to frequent stressors, including elevated nutrient loading and extreme hydrologic events, which impact water quality and disrupt ecosystem stability and health. The capacity of an estuary to resist changes in function in response to precipitation events is a key component of maintaining estuarine health in our changing climate. However, generalizable patterns in factors related to estuarine responses to extreme precipitation remain unknown. We investigate physicochemical factors and land-use characteristics that are associated with ecological resistance to precipitation ‚Äì broadly defined as the magnitude of ecosystem change induced by an event ‚Äì in five disparate estuaries distributed across the continental United States. Using long-term meteorological and water quality data from the National Estuarine Research Reserve System along with land use/land cover and population data, we examine relationships between the resistance index ‚Äì a proxy for ecosystem stability calculated using dissolved oxygen ‚Äì and physicochemical and urban land use characteristics on local-to-continental scales. Contrary to our initial hypothesis, we found that more urbanized estuaries were more resistant to precipitation events, and that water temperature, water column depth, turbidity, nitrogen, and chlorophyll-a were related to resistance on a continental scale. However, these trends interacted with estuarine salinity and varied across individual estuaries; where we found additional relationships of resistance with salinity, turbidity, phosphate concentrations, N:P, and tree cover. Considering emerging stressors from new climatic scenarios and from urbanization, these results are important for representing the impacts of disturbances in large-scale models and for informing management decisions regarding estuarine water quality."
6399	Definitive	"Documenting the seasonal temperature cycle constitutes an essential step towards mitigating risks associated with extreme weather events in a future warmer world. The mid-Piacenzian Warm Period (mPWP), 3.3 – 3.0 million years ago, featured global temperatures approximately 3°C above pre-industrial levels. It represents an ideal period for directed paleoclimate reconstructions equivalent to model projections for 2100 under moderate Shared Socioeconomic Pathway SSP2-4.5. Here, seasonal clumped isotope analyses in fossil mollusc shells from the North Sea are presented to test Pliocene Model Intercomparison Project 2 outcomes. Joint data and model evidence reveals enhanced summer warming (+4.2 ± 2.6 °C) compared to winter (+2.2 ± 2.0°C) during the mPWP, equivalent to SSP2-4.5 outcomes for future climate. We show that Arctic Amplification of global warming weakens mid-latitude summer circulation while intensifying seasonal contrast in temperature and precipitation, leading to an increased risk of summer heatwaves and other extreme weather events in Europe’s future."
2036	Definitive	"Branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (brGDGTs) in lake sediments are increasingly being used to reconstruct past temperatures. However, recent studies suggest that brGDGT distributions and concentrations vary with lake size and environmental conditions such as seasonality and its effects on water column temperature and chemistry. To test their use as a paleothermometer in high-altitude environments of mid-latitude North America, we analyzed brGDGT distributions in lake surface sediments across a range of lake depths and elevations in the Rocky Mountains of Wyoming and Colorado. Our results suggest that brGDGT distributions and the MBT’5Me index correlate with water column temperatures, which are sensitive to both lake water depth and air temperatures. Based on these relationships, we developed a calibration to mean summer air temperatures using a Bayesian regression model that incorporates the MBT’5Me index and lake water depth.  We applied our calibration to lake sediments from Lower Paintrock Lake in northern Wyoming to test its use as a paleothermometer. Reconstructed temperature trends are consistent with pollen-inferred temperatures at the same site and with known regional climate history, demonstrating that our calibration can be successfully applied to infer temperatures in high-altitude environments of mid-latitude North America."
5340	Evidential	"Amplified warming of high latitudes and rapid thaw of frozen ground threatens permafrost carbon stocks. The presence of permafrost modulates water infiltration and flow, as well as sediment transport, on soil-mantled slopes, influencing the balance of advective fluvial processes to diffusive processes on hillslopes in ways that are different from temperate settings. These processes that shape permafrost landscapes also impact the carbon stored on soil-mantled hillslopes via temperature, saturation, slope stability such that carbon stocks and landscape morphometry should be closely linked. We studied ~67,000 headwater basins between 25-90 °N to determine whether the thermal state of the soil sets the balance between hillslope and fluvial erosion processes, as evidenced by the density of the channel networks (i.e. drainage density) and the proportion of convex to concave topography (hillslopes and river valleys, respectively). Watersheds within permafrost regions have lower drainage densities than regions without permafrost, regardless of watershed glacial history, mean annual precipitation and relief. Independent of the dataset resolution and analysis method, we find evidence that advective fluvial processes are inhibited in permafrost landscapes compared to their temperate counterparts. Frozen soils likely inhibit channel development, and we predict that climate warming will lower incision thresholds to promote growth of the channel network in permafrost landscapes. By demonstrating how the balance of advective versus diffusive processes might shift with future warming, we gain insight into the mechanisms that shift these landscapes from sequestering to exporting carbon."
2800	Evidential	"The maritime continent exports an enormous amount of heat and moisture to the rest of the globe via deep atmospheric convection. How this export has changed through time during the last deglacial period and through the Holocene, is hardly known yet critical for the understanding of global climate dynamics. Here we present a continuous paleoclimate record from southern Thailand covering the last 18,000 years, including the first land-based temperature reconstruction of tropical SE Asia. We found evidence for a strongly seasonal climate for most of the deglacial period, causing biomass burning and suppression of rainforest growth, despite rising CO2 levels and increasing mean humidity. Temperatures were ca. 5°C cooler than today during the last cold stadial periods, and ca. 2°C warmer between 7000-2000 yr ago. We also find that tropical wet-season insolation (WSI) is a primary driver of deep atmospheric convection, exerting a strong influence on global climate dynamics."
5474	Definitive	"The exacerbation of floods and the extension of droughts, attributed to climate change and other human-induced factors, are posing a substantial risk to communities by causing water scarcity and insecurity. The significance of safeguarding water resources and managing them is increasingly gaining prominence. Snow is an efficient source of water for recharging groundwater compared to rainfall. This is attributed to its gradual melting process and capacity to infiltrate the soil, thereby providing sustenance to the groundwater. Thus, snow drought can be considered a major contributing factor to the issue of water scarcity. The objective of this study was to investigate the evolution of snow drought over the period spanning from 1980 to 2022, as well as its impact on agricultural drought across the Upper Mississippi River Basin (UMRB). This research employed the AgERA5 reanalysis gridded data at surface level with a spatial resolution of 0.1¬∞, obtained from the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), to assess the snow drought. An analysis is conducted for comparison between the spatial estimations of snow drought in the UMBR and two other drought indicators, namely the evaporative demand drought index (EDDI) and water deficit amounts. The effects of the El Ni√±o and La Ni√±a phenomena on the UMRB as well as the results of the summer drought conditions were reviewed. The results point to two important findings. The former is that the snow-drought-affected zones show an increasing trend from the past to the present in the UMRB. The latter is that severe snow droughts in the winter of a water year trigger severe agricultural droughts in the summer months of the same water year. It is seen that monitoring snow droughts is as essential as following rainfall regimes in the planning of water resources, agricultural production, and irrigation methods."
8811	Hypothetical	"Internal climate variability (ICV) remains a major source of uncertainty in climate projections, complicating impact assessments across critical sectors. Given that ICV emerges from the nonlinear interactions of the climate system, we argue that nonlinear dynamical (NLD) approaches can improve its characterization, providing physically interpretable insights that strengthen adaptation strategies and support multisector decision-making.  However, despite their suitability for such problems, NLD approaches remain largely underutilized in the analysis of initial condition large ensembles (LEs). We argue that a diverse suite of NLD approaches offers a promising pathway for systematically extracting robust insights from LEs. If effectively applied and systematically integrated, these methods could fully harness the potential of LEs, uncovering underlying patterns and variability across ensemble members to refine fundamental insights from climate projections. This will help bridge the gap between complex climate dynamics and practical resilience strategies, ensuring that decision-makers, resource managers, and infrastructure planners have a more reliable foundation for navigating irreducible uncertainty."
4578	Evidential	"To provide insights into glacier-climate dynamics of the South Shetland Islands (SSI), NW Antarctic Peninsula, we present a new deglaciation and readvance model for the Bellingshausen Ice Cap (BIC) on Fildes Peninsula and for King George Island/Isla 25 de Mayo (KGI) ~62¬∞S. Deglaciation on KGI began after c. 15 ka cal BP and had progressed to within present-day limits on the Fildes Peninsula, its largest ice-free peninsula, by c. 6.6‚Äì5.3 ka cal BP. Probability density phase analysis of chronological data constraining Holocene glacier advances on KGI revealed up to eight 95% probability ‚Äògaps‚Äô during which readvances could have occurred. These are grouped into four stages ‚Äì Stage 1: a readvance and marine transgression, well-constrained by field data, between c. 7.4‚Äì6.6 ka cal BP; Stage 2: four probability ‚Äògaps‚Äô, less well-constrained by field data, between c. 5.3‚Äì2.2 ka cal BP; Stage 3: a well-constrained but restricted ‚Äòreadvance‚Äô between c. 1.7‚Äì1.5 ka; Stage 4: two further minor ‚Äòreadvances‚Äô, one less well-constrained by field data between c. 1.3‚Äì0.7 ka cal BP (68% probability), and a ‚Äòfinal‚Äô well-constrained ‚Äòreadvance‚Äô after <0.7 ka cal BP. The Stage 1 readvance occurred as colder and more negative Southern Annular Mode (SAM)-like conditions developed, and marginally stronger/poleward shifted westerly winds led to more storms and precipitation on the SSI. Readvances after c. 5.3 ka cal BP were possibly more frequent, driven by reducing spring/summer insolation at 62¬∞S and negative SAM-like conditions, but weaker (equatorward shifted) westerlies over the SSI led to reduced storminess, restricting readvances within or close to present day limits. Late Holocene readvances were anti-phased with sub-aquatic moss layers in lake records unaffected by glaciofluvial inputs. Retreat from ‚ÄòNeoglacial‚Äô glacier limits and the recolonisation of lakes by sub-aquatic moss in the post-bomb era (>1950 CE) is associated with recent warming/more positive SAM-like conditions."
6337	Hypothetical	"Understanding Earth’s changing climate is a crucial challenge. However, the available time series of direct measurements are often insufficient to fully capture climatic process that unfolds over centuries and millennia. Combining History and Geology can fill this gap. Focusing on rainfall and flood events, this research proposes a multidisciplinary approach to integrate the sedimentary and meteorological records of the Magra River (Northern Italy), using historical data as a bridge between the two datasets. A pristine record of shallow-water shelf sediments, collected at the mouth of the river and covering the last thousand years, is analysed interpreting sand layers as flood events. The results are compared with a coherent historical record of floods and river activity spanning six centuries and instrumental measurements spanning two centuries. The geological data are reasonably consistent with rainfall data and historical records, testifying for the reliability of the river mouth sedimentary record as a proxy for river discharge. The complete dataset and the comparison with other basin of the northwestern Mediterranean indicate common floods during the second half of the XII, XIV, XVI and XVIII centuries, and at the beginning of the second half of the XX century, all periods characterised by predominantly negative phases of the North Atlantic Oscillation."
8197	Evidential	"Existing climate studies mainly assessed the effect of greenhouse gases and aerosols, among other forcings on Earth’s temperature. None of them has not evaluated the effect of the planetary orbital changes on Earth’s temperature. Here, we deconvolved the effects of greenhouse gases and planetary orbital changes on Earth’s temperature and to forecast the latter at different time scales. Our results suggest that Earth’s revolution and rotation prompted ~75.4% and 15.9% of the observed Earth’s intra-annual temperature changes, while Moon’s revolution and other planet motions accounted for 8.3% and 0.3%, respectively. Planetary orbits contributed to ~11.5% of global warming since 1837 and will continue to warm the Earth by ~0.13 °C from 2020 to 2027. However, planetary orbits may trigger ~0.25 °C of Earth’s cooling from 2027 to 2050, which is still far below the impact of CO2 and will not be enough to reverse the warming trend.The changes in Earth's temperature are determined by the orbital changes of planets and the impact of human activities. The changes in planetary orbits are beyond human control, so studying the impact of planetary orbit changes on Earth's temperature changes is crucial for the long-term development of humanity. This study has opened up a new research direction for climate change and is of milestone significance."
8663	Definitive	"Sediment transport in rivers is not uniform through time. Highly intermittent systems, which only transport bedload during the most significant flow events, are particularly sensitive to changes in climate and precipitation patterns. Quantifying river intermittency is critical for assessing how fluvial landscapes will respond to projected changes in precipitation extremes due to climate change, and due to the vulnerability of landscapes and people to fluvial processes. Here, we generate new constraints on recent to modern fluvial intermittency factors – the frequency at which bedload is mobilized in a river – based on field measurements in the Gulf of Corinth, Greece, and Holocene sediment accumulation rates. Results reveal some of the lowest documented intermittency factors to-date, showing Mediterranean rivers can transport their entire annual sediment budget in a rare storm event. Coupling intermittency calculations with historical flood and precipitation data indicates rivers in this environment are dominated by bedload transport during one storm every c. 4 years, associated with rainfall > 50 mm/d and subsequent floods; this hydroclimate is typical of the Mediterranean. Furthermore, climate models predict precipitation extremes will increase across Europe, and the frequency of events that surpass thresholds of sediment transport will increase non-linearly, potentially causing sediment budgets to double by 2100. As the global area of arid land likely to host intermittent rivers also increases, intermittency-dominated landscapes are on the edge of significant geomorphic change, driven by global warming."
5434	Exploratory	"The impact of climate change on reproductive decision-making is becoming a significant issue, with anecdotal evidence indicating a growing number of people factoring their concerns about climate change into their childbearing plans. Although empirical research has explored climate change and its relationship to mental health, as well as the motivations behind reproductive decision-making independently, a gap in the literature remains that bridges these topics at their nexus. This review endeavours to fill this gap by synthesising the available evidence connecting climate change-related concerns with reproductive decision-making and exploring the reasons and motivations behind this relationship. A systematic review using six databases was conducted to identify relevant literature. Included published and unpublished studies reported quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods data related to: (1) climate change, (2) mental health and wellbeing concerns, and (3) reproductive decision-making. Findings were synthesised narratively using a parallel-results convergent synthesis design and the quality of studies was appraised using three validated assessment tools. Four hundred and forty-six documents were screened using pre-defined inclusion criteria, resulting in the inclusion of thirteen studies. The studies were conducted between 2012 and 2022 primarily in Global North countries (e.g., USA, Canada, New Zealand, and European countries). Climate change concerns were typically associated with less positive attitudes towards reproduction and a desire and/or intent for fewer children or none at all. Four themes explaining this relationship were identified: uncertainty about the future of an unborn child, environmentalist views centred on overpopulation and overconsumption, meeting family subsistence needs, and environmental and political sentiments. The current evidence reveals a complex relationship between climate change concerns and reproductive decision-making, grounded in ethical, environmental, livelihood, and political considerations. Further research is required to better understand and address this issue with an intercultural approach, particularly among many highly affected Global South populations, to ensure comparability and generalisable results."
1120	Hypothetical	"Tephrochronology is increasingly being recognised as a key tool for the correlation of disparate palaeoclimatic archives, underpinning chronological models and facilitating climatically independent comparisons of climate proxies. Tephra frameworks integrating both distal and proximal tephra occurrences are essential to these investigations providing key information on their spatial distributions, geochemical signatures, eruptive sources as well as any available chronological and/or stratigraphic information. Frameworks also help to avoid mis-correlation of horizons and provide important information on volcanic history. Here we present a comprehensive framework of 14 tephra horizons from North Atlantic marine sequences spanning 25-60 ka BP. Horizons previously discovered as visible or coarse-grained deposits have been combined with 11 newly recognised volcanic events, identified through the application of cryptotephra identification and characterisation methods to a wide network of marine sequences. Their isochronous integrity has been assessed using their physical characteristics. All horizons originated from Iceland with the vast majority having a basaltic composition sourced from the Grímsvötn, Kverkfjöll, Hekla/Vatnafjöll and Katla volcanicsystems. New occurrences, improved stratigraphic placements and a refinement of the geochemical signature of the NAAZ II are reported and the range of the FMAZ IV has been extended. In addition, several significant geochemical populations that further investigations could show to be isochronous are reported. This tephra framework provides the foundation for the correlation and synchronisation of these marine records to the Greenland ice-cores and European terrestrial records to investigate the phasing, rate, timing and mechanisms controlling the rapid climate changes that characterised the last glacial period."
7723	Evidential	"The UK experienced an unprecedented heatwave in 2022, with temperatures reaching 40¬∞C for the first time in recorded history. This extreme heat was accompanied by widespread fires across London and elsewhere in England, which destroyed houses and prompted evacuations. While attribution studies have identified a strong human fingerprint contributing to the heatwave, no studies have attributed the associated fires to anthropogenic influence. In this study, we assess the contribution of human-induced climate change to fire weather conditions over the summer of 2022 using simulations from the HadGEM3-A model with and without anthropogenic emissions, and apply the Canadian Fire Weather Index. Our analysis reveals at least a 6-fold increase in the probability of very high fire weather in the UK due to human influence, most of which is driven by high fire conditions across England. These findings highlight the significant role of human-induced climate change in the emerging threat of wildfires in the UK. As we experience more hotter and drier summers as temperatures continue to rise, the frequency and severity of fires are likely to increase, posing significant risks to both natural ecosystems and human populations. This study underscores the need for further research to quantify the changing fire risk due to our changing climate, and the urgent requirement for mitigation and adaptation efforts to address the growing wildfire threat in the UK."
8377	Evidential	"As variable renewable energy resources become a larger part of the generation mix in the United States (U.S.), so does the potential impact of prolonged periods of low wind and solar generation, known as variable renewable energy (VRE) droughts. In a future decarbonized or low-carbon grid, naturally occurring VRE droughts need to be evaluated for their potential impact on grid reliability. This study is the first of its kind to examine the impacts of compound VRE energy droughts in the Western U.S. across a range of climate change and future infrastructure scenarios. We find that compound VRE drought severity will increase significantly in the future, primarily due to the dramatic increase in wind and solar generation needed to meet decarbonization goals. Climate change is expected to increase the variability of energy drought severity, which has implications for sizing energy storage necessary for mitigating drought events. We also examine the spatial patterns of compound VRE drought events that effect multiple regions of the grid simultaneously. These co-occurring events have distinct spatial patterns depending on the season. We observed overall fewer connected events in the future with the combined effect of climate change and infrastructure growth, although in the fall we observe a climate change-induced shift toward events which impact more regions simultaneously."
3540	Exploratory	"We explore the response of the Earth’s climate and carbon system to an idealized sequential addition and removal of CO2 to the atmosphere, following a symmetric and continuous emissions pathway, in contrast to the discontinuous emissions pathways that have largely informed our understanding of the climate response to net-zero and net-negative emissions to date.  We find, using both an Earth System Model and an ensemble of simple climate model realizations, that warming during the emissions reduction and negative emissions phases is defined by a combination of a proportionality of warming to cumulative emissions characterized by the transient climate response to emissions (TCRE), and a deviation from that proportionality that is governed by the zero emissions commitment (ZEC). About half of the ZEC is realized before reaching zero emissions, and the ZEC thus also controls the timing between peak cumulative CO2 emissions and peak temperature, such that peak temperature may occur before peak cumulative emissions if ZEC is negative, underscoring the importance of ZEC in climate policies aimed to limit peak warming. Thus we argue that ZEC is best defined as the committed warming relative to the expected TCRE proportionality, rather than the additional committed warming that will occur after reaching net zero CO2 emissions. Once established, the combined TCRE and ZEC relationship holds almost to complete removal of prior cumulative CO2 emissions. As cumulative CO2 emissions approach zero through negative CO2 emissions, CO2 concentrations drop below preindustrial values, while residual long-term climate change continues, governed by multicentennial dynamical processes."
5538	Definitive	"Water discharge and sediment flux variations are important parameters controlling the morphodynamical behavior of rivers. Although quantitative estimates for discharge and flux variability are well constrained for modern rivers, far fewer assessments of flow and sediment flux intermittency in ancient fluvial systems from the rock record are available. In this study we explore the relationship between water discharge, sediment flux variability and patterns of changing fluvial stratigraphic architecture in the Middle Eocene Escanilla Formation, Spain. We estimate water discharge intermittency factor (IWF) to range from 0.03 – 0.11 in the HA intervals and from 0.10 – 0.32 in the LA intervals. Sediment flux intermittency factor (ISF) is in the range of 0.008 – 0.01 in the HA intervals and from 0.01 – 0.03 in the LA intervals. Consequently, we suggest that high amalgamation (HA) intervals were most likely deposited under more intermittent and short-lived intense precipitation events, while low amalgamation (LA) intervals were the result of less intermittent flows spread throughout the year. Overall, our estimates are consistent with values from modern ephemeral rivers typically found in arid to semi-arid climatic conditions, which is in agreement with available proxy data for the Middle Eocene climatic context of the studied alluvial system. Our data highlights the important connection between hydroclimate, river morphodynamics and landscape evolution, and has implications to predict river flow and sediment transport across the Earth’s surface in the geological past."
2871	Definitive	"Caldera-forming eruptions have the potential to impact global climate and induce drastic socioeconomic change. However, the criteria to identify volcanoes capable of producing large magnitude eruptions in the future are not well constrained. Here we compile and analyse data, revealing that volcanoes which have produced catastrophic caldera-forming eruptions in the past, typically show larger ranges of long-term erupted bulk-rock geochemistry compared to those that have not. This observation suggests that geochemical variability is a measure of a magmatic systems size. Using a 2D thermal model that simulates the growth and evolution of crustal-scale magmatic systems by stochastic injection of dikes and sills, we show that such behaviour is consistent with differences in crustal magma fluxes. Higher injection rates accumulate greater melt volumes in more extensive crustal plumbing systems, leading to more variable distributions of temperatures and thus melt composition. We conclude that compositional variability should be included in the catalogue of criteria to identify volcanic systems with greater probabilities of producing future large eruptions. Importantly, this allows to identify stratovolcanoes with caldera-like geochemical signatures, which have not yet been recognized as systems with greater probabilities of producing large magnitude eruptions."
5465	Definitive	"Bangladesh is one of the countries most affected by climate change. Internal migration is often presented as a response to environmental degradation in rural areas. Here, we hypothesise that climate-induced changes and adaptations impact local production and the local labour market, seasonally pushing out unskilled landless workers. We focus on different categories of livelihoods and their interactions to understand the local socio-ecological context for unskilled landless workers. We conducted fourteen semi-directed interviews and six focus group discussions with villagers in March-April 2022. We use a configurational approach considering changes>impacts> responses>impacts of responses to analyse our data for agricultural farmers, fish farmers, independent fishermen and unskilled workers. We conducted rainfall analysis on Chirps data for 1981-2021 to confront perception of changes to climate data. Villagers reported that waterlogging was the most significant change. Covid-19 lockdowns were cited as an aggravating factor. Most climate-induced changes began to occur gradually over the past 25 years. Climate data compared with emic perception confirm these results. We find that changes, particularly climate-induced changes, increase local inequalities. The shift in land use to fish farming, partly driven by the motivation to adapt to waterlogging and salinisation, increases the waterlogging problem locally. As a result, farms are submerged, production is lost, and fewer jobs are available locally. Smallholder farmers suffer more than wealthier farmers and have more difficulty covering the losses associated with these changes and the costs associated with adaptations. Fishermen are converting to unskilled work, and unskilled and landless workers migrate to other rural destinations for labour."
4774	Definitive	"Methane (CH$_4$) is a potent greenhouse gas whose contribution to anthropogenic radiative forcing of the climate system is second only to carbon dioxide (CO$_2$). CH$_4$ emission reduction has become central to global climate mitigation policy, resulting most notably in the Global Methane Pledge (GMP), pledging a 30\% reduction of CH$_4$ emissions by 2030. Methane is, however, much shorter-lived in the atmosphere than CO$_2$, so emissions reductions may have different impacts on global warming over time. We quantify the difference over time in global annual mean surface temperature of the GMP versus the equivalent amount of CO$_2$ emission reduction. The avoidance of CH$_4$ emissions in the 2020s due to the GMP initially results in greater relative cooling than the avoidance of the equivalent amount of CO$_2$ emissions over the same period, but less relative cooling after $\sim$2060, when almost all CH$_4$ emitted during the 2020s has been removed from the atmosphere but much of the CO$_2$ emitted during the 2020s remains. However, the GMP placing the world on a lower CH$_4$ emissions trajectory after 2030 results in a persistently and substantially greater reduction to global warming than the equivalent change in the CO$_2$ emissions trajectory, with a maximum difference of 0.22$\pm$0.06$^\circ$C in 2055 and relative cooling for well over a century. This equates to a large difference in avoided climate change damages. While the greatest reduction in warming is obtained by reducing both CH$_4$ and CO$_2$ emissions, our results underscore the striking global societal benefits of sustained reduction in CH$_4$ emissions."
2412	Exploratory	"We used Natural Language Processing (NLP) to assess topic diversity in all research articles (_75,000) from eighteen water science and hydrology journals published between 1991 and 2019. We found that individual water science and hydrology research articles are becoming increasingly interdisciplinary in the sense that, on average, the number of equally-common topics represented in individual articles is increasing. This is true even though the body of water science and hydrology literature as a whole is not becoming more topically diverse. These findings suggest that the National Research Council’s (1991) recommendation to increase multidisciplinarity of hydrological research has been followed. Topics with the largest increases in popularity were Climate Change Impacts, Water Policy & Planning, and Pollutant Removal. Topics with the largest decreases in popularity were Stochastic Models and Numerical Models. At a journal level, Water Resources Research, Journal of Hydrology, and Hydrological Processes are the three most topically diverse journals in the discipline. We also identified topics that are becoming increasingly isolated, and which could potentially benefit from integrating more with the wider hydrology discipline."
2592	Definitive	"In permafrost soils, substantial amounts of organic carbon (OC) are potentially protected from microbial degradation and transformation into greenhouse gases by association with reactive iron (Fe) minerals. As permafrost environments respond to climate change, increased drainage of thaw lakes in permafrost regions is predicted. Soils will subsequently develop on these drained thaw lakes, but the role of Fe-OC associations in future OC stabilization during this predicted soil development is unknown. To fill this knowledge gap, we have examined Fe-OC associations in organic, cryoturbated and mineral horizons along a 5500-year chronosequence of drained thaw lake basins in Utqiaƒ°vik, Alaska. By applying chemical extractions, we found that ~17 % of the total OC content in cryoturbated horizons is associated with reactive Fe minerals, compared to ~10 % in organic or mineral horizons. As soil development advances, the total stocks of Fe-associated OC more than double within the first 50 years after thaw lake drainage, because of increased storage of Fe-associated OC in cryoturbated horizons (from 8 to 75 % of the total Fe-associated OC stock). Spatially-resolved nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry showed that OC is primarily associated with Fe(III) (oxyhydr)oxides which were identified by 57Fe M√∂ssbauer spectroscopy as ferrihydrite. High OC:Fe mass ratios (>0.22) indicate that Fe-OC associations are formed via co-precipitation, chelation and aggregation. These results demonstrate that, given the proposed enhanced drainage of thaw lakes under climate change, OC is increasingly incorporated and stabilized by the association with reactive Fe minerals as a result of soil formation and increased cryoturbation."
4970	Definitive	"Modern and fossil pollen data are widely used in paleoenvironmental research to characterise past environmental changes in a given location. However, their discrete and discontinuous nature can limit the inferences that can be made from them. In contrasts, deriving continuous spatial maps of the pollen presence from point-based datasets would enable more robust regional characterization of such past changes. To address this problem, we propose a comprehensive collection of European pollen presence maps including 194 pollen taxa derived from the interpolation of pollen data from the Eurasian Modern Pollen Database (EMPD v2) restricted to the Euro-Mediterranean Basin. To do so, we developed an automatic Kriging-based interpolation workflow to select an optimal geostatistical model describing the spatial variability for each taxon. The output of the interpolation model consists in a series of multivariate predictive maps of Europe at 25-km scale, showing the occurrence probability of pollen taxa, the predicted presence based on diverse probability thresholds, and the interpolation uncertainty for each taxon. Visual inspections of the maps and systematic cross-validation tests showed that the ensemble of predictions is reliable even in data-scarce regions, with a relatively low uncertainty, and robust to complex and non-stationary pollen distributions. The maps, freely distributed as GeoTIFF files, are proposed as a ready-to-use tool for spatial paleoenvironmental characterization. Since the interpolation model only uses the coordinates of the observation to spatialise the data, similar maps could also be derived for fossil pollen records, thus enabling the spatial characterization of past changes, and possibly, their subsequent use for quantitative paleoclimate reconstructions."
4670	Evidential	"Marine animal diversity during the late Cambrian was reduced by a series of extinctions that have generally been attributed to oceanic anoxic events associated with positive carbon isotope excursions. Here we present carbon and uranium isotope ratios (Œ¥13C and Œ¥238U values) as proxies for global carbon cycle and oceanic redox conditions, respectively, from carbonate rocks of the Wa‚Äôergang section, South China. The dataset spans an interval that includes the last major negative Œ¥13C excursion (TOCE) of the Cambrian Period. The TOCE is a globally documented event, recovery from which corresponds to the terminal Cambrian extinction event. The Œ¥13C and Œ¥238U values covary through the section, shifting initially to lower values, with Œ¥238U falling below the modern open-ocean seawater value from the start to the middle of the profile, followed by a shift to higher values towards the end of the Cambrian. Neither the co-occurrence of Œ¥13C and Œ¥238U negative excursions, nor the association of rising Œ¥238U with extinction have been commonly reported. Here we argue that robust positive coupling of Œ¥13C and Œ¥238U relates to the existence of extensive intermediate reducing settings (from low-O2 suboxia to intermittent anoxia) during the late Cambrian alongside low atmospheric pO2 and a greenhouse climate. Similarly, a stepwise increase in the Œ¥238U baseline in carbonates across the Ediacaran‚àíCambrian boundary is consistent with the growing importance of an intermediate reducing sink through that interval. We propose further that divergent trends in lower and upper ocean redox conditions could have driven the parallel isotope excursions. An expansion of intermediate reducing conditions, rather than persistent anoxic euxinia, is consistent with the recovery of Œ¥13C and Œ¥238U to higher values, as well as the presence of benthic fauna and shoreward extension of deeper-water fauna that may have had a greater tolerance against hypoxia."
8248	Definitive	"This study introduces the serially complete precipitation dataset for South America (SC-PREC4SA), a daily precipitation dataset (1960-2015) designed to address observational gaps and ensure temporal consistency across diverse climates. The raw dataset underwent quality control, gap-filling, and homogenization procedures. Applied robust quality control highlighted common but also overlooked issues, enhancing data reliability. Gap-filling achieved a mean accuracy of 70 % (60 %) in the prediction on wet/dry days (wet-day magnitude). These metrics highlight the reliability of the gap-filling process, particularly in mixed climates, where station networks are sparse. The homogenization algorithm, focused primarily on wet days, effectively reduced inhomogeneities while preserving precipitation variability across South America. By integrating a unified framework and multiple outputs from 7799 stations, SC-PREC4SA provides a robust dataset that captures daily precipitation patterns with high to moderate accuracy and consistency. It offers a valuable resource for climate research, hydrological modeling, and water resource management, addressing longstanding challenges in precipitation data availability and quality for South America."
5585	Exploratory	"The aim of this study is to explore how climate change education is delivered and received in higher education at SMC.¬† As a qualitative study, the study was conducted in the first semester of 2022-2023 and involved 30 students and teachers who participated in semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions. The data analysis revealed the themes that emerged from the students‚Äô complex views and deep knowledge of climate change, as well as the teachers‚Äô experiences, challenges and effectiveness in teaching this topic. The study also suggested some recommendations for improving climate change education, emphasizing the need for holistic and transformative teaching methods. The study drew on relevant theoretical frameworks to inform the discussion and contribute to the literature. The findings of this study have implications for the wider field of climate change education and invite further research and action in this area."
8258	Hypothetical	"Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) at rates of several gigatonnes (Gt) per year may be needed _to mitigate climate change. However, one major uncertainty is that the risk of injection-induced _earthquakes may grow with this scale of deployment. In this work, we develop a tool, named _CO2BLOCKSEISM, which uses simplified physics models to screen subsurface storage _resources constrained by fault slip potential at regional scales. The tool relies on (1) analytical _solutions of the pressure response of saline aquifers to multi-site CO2 injection at time-varying _rates and (2) a Monte Carlo-type probabilistic model for evaluating the probability of fault slip _incorporating uncertainties in geomechanical variables at the basin scale. Integration of the two _modules yields the temporal evolution of slip probability for mapped faults. We validate the _approach against seismic activity in Oklahoma caused by basin-wide, low-pressure subsurface _wastewater disposal at equivalent rates to large-scale CCS. We show that CO2BLOCKSEISM _can capture key features of induced seismicity in this region. We apply the methodology to the _southern Utsira Formation, Norway. We find approximately 12.5 Gt CO2 can be stored in this _region over 50 years of continuous injection while maintaining the stability of major faults that _could otherwise induce felt earthquakes. The use of fault-slip potential as a limiting condition _may enable a more restrictive and realistic estimate of the potential for rates of scale-up for _CO2 storage regionally and globally._"
8118	Evidential	"As climate change accelerates, heat waves are becoming more frequent, intense, and deadly. Enhancing forecasting capabilities through a better understanding of sub-seasonal predictors of extreme heat is crucial for adaptation efforts. This study utilizes an interpretable machine learning model, implementing Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) with SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), to evaluate the predictive strength of various climate factors—including local weather, global climate indices, geopotential heights, soil moisture, and sea surface temperatures—on extreme daily maximum temperatures. This model demonstrates strong predictive performance for extreme heat in Austin, TX, USA, on the sub-seasonal time scale, with soil moisture features emerging as more influential than atmospheric features. Notably, our analysis uncovers previously underexplored teleconnections between distant soil moisture anomalies and local extreme heat, warranting further investigation. It is also shown that the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) has predictive value for extreme heat in Austin, underscoring its utility relative to other indices like ENSO and NAO. This method shows promise for application to other cities and for integration with dynamical modeling approaches, advancing sub-seasonal extreme heat forecasting more broadly."
3024	Evidential	"This technical note compares two groundwater flooding assessments for a site on the Rockaway Peninsula of New York City, a coastal barrier island subject to several climate change risks including groundwater flooding. One assessment was performed using a MODFLOW groundwater model while the other used an interpolated water table map constructed in GIS. The two methods showed minor differences in estimates for the current position of the water table. Likewise, the position of the water table later in this century due to 0.75 m of sea level rise indicated similar groundwater levels as well as similar patterns of emergent wetlands. Both methods yielded the same insight that widespread groundwater emergence is expected in the study area within the next 50 years. This suggests that for settings with similar topology and hydrogeological conditions, such as sandy barrier islands and low-lying coastal plains, simple water table mapping techniques are a reasonable alternative groundwater flooding assessment tool comparable to full groundwater models which can be time-consuming and expensive to create."
8408	Hypothetical	"This paper examines the significant impacts of climate change on community sustainability in Atlantic Canada, particularly for vulnerable populations. Rising temperatures and sea levels threaten livelihoods, infrastructure, and ecosystems, necessitating a transformative approach to avoid maladaptation. Current strategies primarily rooted in natural sciences and economic models lack the integration of social dimensions essential for effective sustainability assessments. The paper highlights the need for a holistic, transdisciplinary framework that encompasses environmental, economic, and social factors, recognizing diverse interpretations of sustainability across various disciplines. It highlights the importance of engaging local communities and Indigenous knowledge in developing context-specific solutions. Additionally, the paper addresses challenges such as differing epistemological perspectives and stakeholder negotiations, advocating for collaborative frameworks that facilitate meaningful dialogue and action. The paper emphasizes that balancing human well-being and ecological health contributes to a more resilient and equitable response to climate change in Atlantic Canada."
7984	Evidential	"Solid waste is the third largest source of anthropogenic methane and mitigating emissions is crucial for addressing climate change. We combine three high-resolution (30–60 m) hyperspectral satellite imagers (EMIT, EnMAP, and PRISMA) to quantify emissions from 38 strongly-emitting disposal sites across worldwide urban methane hotspots. The imagers give consistent emission estimates, with EMIT and EnMAP having better sensitivity than PRISMA. Total observed emissions add up to 230 ± 15 t h-1, representing 5% of reported global solid waste emissions. Our estimates exceed the facility-level Climate TRACE inventory by a factor of 1.8, while we only detect emissions from 9 of the inventory’s 20 highest-emitting sites, highlighting the importance of facility-level information. Furthermore, multi-month observations reveal emission patterns potentially linked to facility operations. We estimate that these instruments could detect up to 60% of global landfill emissions, critically expanding on satellite instruments designed for methane and supporting emission mitigation."
3577	Exploratory	"Mineral dust aerosols impact Earth‚Äôs energy budget through interactions with radiation, clouds, atmospheric chemistry, the cryosphere and biogeochemistry. In this Review, we summarize these interactions and assess the resulting impacts of dust, and of changes in dust, on global climate and climate change. The total effect of dust interactions on Earth‚Äôs global energy budget‚Äîthe dust effective radiative effect‚Äîis -0.2 ¬± 0.5 Wm-2 (90% confidence interval), suggesting that dust net cools the climate. Global dust mass loading has increased 55 ¬± 30% since pre-industrial times, driven largely by increases in dust from Asia and North Africa, leading to changes in the Earth‚Äôs energy budget. Indeed, this increase in dust has produced a global mean effective radiative forcing of -0.07 ¬± 0.18 Wm-2, somewhat counteracting greenhouse warming. Current climate models and climate assessments do not represent the historical increase in dust and thus omit the resulting radiative forcing, biasing climate change projections and assessments of climate sensitivity. Climate model simulations of future changes in dust diverge widely and are very uncertain. Further work is thus needed to constrain the radiative effects of dust on climate and to improve the representation of dust in climate models."
7141	Definitive	"Land management changes threaten the ecological functionality of grassland ecosystems worldwide, including the ability of these ecosystems to store carbon in their soils. The Banni grasslands, Asia’s largest tropical grassland, is no different in this regard. Despite being a highly biodiverse ecosystem with an extensive land use history, information on soil carbon fluxes in this ecosystem remains conspicuously absent. In this study, we map soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks within the upper 30cm depth across land use-land cover (LULC) classes by combining high-resolution satellite imagery with field-based soil carbon data from a network of long-term monitoring sites. We find that Banni currently stores 27.69 MtC in its soils, with an average SOC density of 119.61 ± 3.50 tC/ha (Mean ± Std. Error). These estimates compare favourably with arid and semi-arid grasslands as well as seasonally-flooded savannas across the tropics. The highest SOC densities are found in restored grasslands (142.72 ± 5.72 tC/ha), reaffirming the potential of carbon recovery from ecological restoration. Tracing 10 years of LULC change in the region indicates the further expansion of the invasive tree Prosopis juliflora across the landscape, but its impacts on changes in SOC concentrations estimates remain varied. Our results indicate the large soil carbon storage potential and the SOC fluxes associated with woody encroachment in Banni, and point towards the need for the active management of Banni so that carbon benefits can accrue at meaningful timescales for reversing land degradation and contributing to land-based climate action."
8050	Evidential	"Farmworkers, the ‚Äòfrontline workers‚Äô of our food system, are often exposed to heat stress that is likely to increase in frequency and severity due to climate change. Irrigation can exacerbate heat stress, quantification of which is crucial in intensely irrigated agricultural lands such as the Imperial Valley (IV) in southern California. We present high-resolution maps of wet bulb globe temperature (WBGT), a key indicator of heat exposure in humans, over the IV and quantify the impact of irrigation during day and night in agricultural and urban settings. We derive WBGT from a high-resolution regional climate model (WRF), which shows robust performance against station-derived WBGT metrics yielding R-square up to 0.95 and RMSE as low as 0.71 ‚ÑÉ in agricultural sites. We find that irrigation reduces WBGT by 0.3-1.3 ‚ÑÉ during the wet season in the daytime due to strong evaporative cooling. However, during dry season, irrigation increases WBGT by 0.4-1.3 ‚ÑÉ at night, when the large increase in humidity sufficiently raises the wet-bulb temperature (WBT) with added increase in dry-bulb temperature (DBT) and black globe temperature (BGT), surpassing the weaker evaporative cooling. We also find that the urban and fallow areas adjacent to the crop fields experience increased heat stress due to moisture advection. Modeled WBGT frequently exceeds the regulatory threshold of 24.4 ‚ÑÉ in the crop fields during key harvest seasons with exceedances greater than 50, 150, and 300 hours in April, June, and August 2020, respectively. The heat stress modeling framework presented serves as a prototype to develop climate change adaptation strategies for the agricultural regions of the Imperial Valley as well as the broader Central Valley and inform labor and environmental policies in California and elsewhere."
8795	Hypothetical	"Groundwater, Earth’s largest source of liquid freshwater, is essential for sustaining ecosystems and meeting societal demands. However, accurately quantifying global groundwater withdrawals remains a significant challenge due to inherent uncertainties in input data, sectoral allocation assumptions, and model parameterization. In this study, we analyze global groundwater withdrawals from 2001 to 2020 using a newly developed data-driven Global Groundwater Withdrawal (GGW) model and quantify uncertainties through Monte Carlo simulations. The GGW model integrates reported country-level data with global grid-based datasets to estimate annual withdrawals across domestic, industrial, and agricultural sectors at a 0.1° resolution. Our results indicate an average global groundwater withdrawal of 648 km_ a__, with an uncertainty range of 465-881 km_ a__. Agriculture accounts for 50% of total withdrawals, followed by domestic use at 34.5% and industrial use at 15.5%. Temporal analysis shows increasing groundwater withdrawal in 66% of the IPCC WGI reference regions over the 20 years, with a global average annual increase of 0.5% (varying regionally from 6.5% annual increase to 9% annual decrease). Comparison with previous studies highlights the impact of methodological choices and assumptions about groundwater withdrawal on the resulting global estimates. Our findings underscore the need for comprehensive uncertainty assessments and improved datasets. Expanding spatial coverage in underrepresented regions and enhancing temporal resolution, particularly for dynamic variables like irrigated areas, are crucial for more accurate groundwater withdrawal assessments. These improvements will enable better management and conservation of this vital resource in the face of growing global demands and climate change impacts."
8386	Hypothetical	"A few people have gradually realized that the superposition effect of different planets in the solar system on Earth under high-speed motion and dynamic equilibrium can sometimes trigger extreme natural disasters. Due to the relatively regular changes in the relative positions of the Sun, Moon, and Earth, this study considers these three planets as independent systems. The orbits of other planets in the solar system have relatively complex changes in their positions relative to Earth, so they are considered as a whole. By constructing a dynamic quantification model based on proximity difference to eliminate the interference of internal variability of the Earth and extract the influence of different planetary orbit changes on the variation of atmospheric water vapor content, the analysis shows that Earth's rotation accounts for 4%, the Moon's revolution 10%, Earth's revolution 71%, and other planetary orbits 15% of the total impact of planetary orbital changes on atmospheric water vapor. Finally, an LSTM deep learning model was constructed to predict the changes in atmospheric water vapor content on Earth over the next decade, and the results showed that atmospheric water vapor will show a slow upward trend in the future. The research results not only provide a new perspective for understanding the mechanisms of climate change on Earth, but also provide valuable references for the study of climate evolution on other planets."
3211	Exploratory	"Water is an essential element of life and rainfall. The amount of rainfall directly affects the spatial and temporal distribution of water resources on the Earth. Rainfall has direct impact on agricultural production, daily life activities, and human health. Atmospheric aerosols are essential for rainfall formation; therefore, understanding how dust compositions and distributions affect the regional rainfall pattern is of utmost importance, particularly in the region with high atmospheric dust loading, such as the Middle East and North Africa (MENA). Although aerosol-rainfall research has gained increased attention in the last few decades, many details of aerosol-cloud-rainfall interactions pathways remain unknown. In this work, dust-rainfall connection is examined using a large sample of Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) and rainfall data from Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) and Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), respectively, obtained on daily basis for the years 2015 and 2016 over the MENA region. Observational analysis reveal that rainfall is oppositely related to AOD in low and high rainfall conditions. Exponentially decreasing (increasing) relationship with AOD under low (high) rainfall conditions, at a similar range of AOD in both cases, was observed. Further analysis using angstrom exponent data suggest that the positive (negative) relationship between AOD and rainfall could represent dust indirect effects during the mature (initial) stage of convection. This observational analysis provide a basis to predict rainfall under different dust loading conditions (AOD) using satellite data and provide a benchmark for improving the representation of dust effect on cloud and rainfall processes in the models, which currently have significant uncertainty. While dust and dust storms are considered nuances from air quality perspective, these results highlight their fundamental positive impact on Earth’s climate."
3145	Exploratory	"Climate projections are highly uncertain; this uncertainty is costly and impedes progress on climate policy. This uncertainty is primarily parametric (what numbers do we plug into our equations?) and structural (what equations do we use in the first place?). The former is straightforward to characterise in principle, though may be computationally intensive for complex climate models. The latter is more challenging to characterise and is therefore often ignored. We developed a Bayesian approach to quantify structural uncertainty in climate projections, using the idealised energy-balance model representations of climate physics that underpin many economists' integrated assessment models (and therefore their policy recommendations). We define a model selection parameter, which switches on one of a suite of proposed climate nonlinearities and multidecadal climate feedbacks. We find that a temperature-dependent climate feedback is most consistent with global mean surface temperature observations, but that the sign of the temperature-dependence is opposite of what Earth system models suggest. This discrepancy is likely due to the assumption that the recent pattern effect can be represented as a temperature dependence. Moreover, the most likely model is less probable than the rest of the models combined, indicating that structural uncertainty is important for climate projections. Indeed, under shared socioeconomic pathways similar to current emissions reductions targets, structural uncertainty dwarfs parametric uncertainty in temperature. Consequently, structural uncertainty dominates overall non-socioeconomic uncertainty in economic projections of climate change damages, as estimated from a simple temperature-to-damages calculation. These results indicate that considering structural uncertainty is crucial for integrated assessment models in particular, and for climate projections in general."
5003	Evidential	"At what depth groundwater can be found below the land surface is key to understanding whether it is potentially accessible to ecosystems and humans, or what role it plays in the water cycle. Knowledge of ground-water table depth (WTD) exists at regional scales in many places, but a bottom-up knowledge aggregation to obtain a coherent global picture is exceptionally challenging. Uncertainty in global-scale WTD knowledge severely affects our ability to assess groundwater’s future role in a water cycle altered by changes in climate, land use, and human water use. Global groundwater models offer a top-down pathway to gain this knowledge. However, we find them highly uncertain: four models investigated show WTD disagreements of more than 100 m for one-third of the global land area. Averaged across the models, we estimate that 23% [most deviating model: 71%] of the land area contains shallow groundwater potentially accessible to ecosystems and humans, <10m depth, 57% [29%] is potentially accessible to humans through pumping, 10-100m, while 20% [0.01%] is potentially too costly to access or inaccessible, >100m. Depending on the model, +-63% of global forest coverage and +-54% of irrigated land is inside areas of potentially ecosystem-accessible water, and +-33% of the global population lives in areas with potentially human-accessible groundwater. These results add significant uncertainties to any global-scale analysis, which will not significantly reduce without dedicated efforts. We outline three pathways to reduce this uncertainty through better global datasets, alternative strategies for model evaluation, and greater cooperation with experts."
7144	Evidential	"Understanding air-sea interaction is crucial for our ability to predict future states of the climate system, and to inform economic and societal decision-making. However, the representation of air-sea interactions in climate models is limited by structural errors associated with model resolution. Coarse-resolution climate models do not resolve small-scale structures in the air-sea state, which, due to strong nonlinearities in the coupling formulae, can impact the large-scale air-sea exchange‚Äîa mechanism that has received little attention and is the focus of this paper. Since observations at the temporal and spatial coverage needed to study this problem do not yet exist, we quantify the impact of this small-scale heterogeneity on the large-scale air-sea heat flux by analyzing 1/10¬∞ coupled climate simulations. This effect systematically cools the ocean by about 4W/m2 globally‚Äîwith large spatio-temporal variations‚Äîand mostly enhances the large-scale heat flux. By identifying an overlooked contribution to air-sea heat flux in climate models, we open a promising new direction for addressing biases in climate simulations and thus improving future climate predictions. Furthermore, future observations, like the newly proposed satellite mission ODYSEA35, could potentially observe and quantify this effect directly."
2808	Definitive	"Soil moisture is a key limiting factor of plant productivity in boreal and montane regions, producing additional climate feedbacks through evaporation, regeneration, mortality, and respiration. Understory solar irradiation – the primary driver of surface temperature and evaporative demand – remains poorly represented in vegetation models due to a lack of 3-D canopy geometry. Existing models are further unable to represent processes lacking sufficient parameterization and/or knowledge, with no land model to date utilizing machine learning (ML) to represent vegetation processes. Here, we developed the first hybrid forest ecosystem model using ML (ML-FEM), a specific case of hybrid AI land model (a concept also invented here). In this approach, ML models are trained and validated with a ground-truth dataset, whether observations or high-fidelity simulations, before being applied to vegetation model parameters for inference, internally or externally to the model. Using this approach, we simulated annual understory global solar irradiation (Iu) across 25.2 Mha in southwestern Canada at 1-ha resolution under historical climate and fire scenarios. In cross-validation, we found that linear and ML regression models performed comparably well in the prediction of angular canopy cover (ACC), due to the linearity of its relationship to predictors (linear R2 = 0.938, RMSE = 0.079; ML R2 = 0.939, RMSE = 0.074). Reduced area burned, increased ignitions, and reduced regeneration potential for recent periods resulted in stable or reduced Iu. This suggests that diminished disturbance may reduce Iu through forest aging, masking latent regeneration decline. Only in the most extreme and unconstrained scenarios did Iu increase. In these experiments, conducted in late 2015, we demonstrated an entirely new class of hybrid models that we anticipated to be of vital importance to understanding and representing pattern-based processes in Earth system models."
3563	Definitive	"The density structure of firn has implications for hydrological and climate modelling, and ice shelf stability. The structure of firn can be evaluated from depth models of seismic velocity, widely obtained with Herglotz-Wiechert Inversion (HWI), an approach that considers the slowness of refracted seismic arrivals. However, HWI is strictly appropriate only for steady-state firn profiles and the inversion accuracy can be compromised where firn contains ice layers. In these cases, Full Waveform Inversion (FWI) may yield more success than HWI. FWI extends HWI capabilities by considering the full seismic waveform and incorporates reflected arrivals. Using synthetic firn density profiles, assuming both steady- and non-steady-state accumulation, we show that FWI outperforms HWI for detecting ice slab boundaries (5-80 m thick, 5-80 m deep) and velocity anomalies within firn. FWI can detect slabs thicker than one wavelength (here, 20 m, assuming a maximum frequency of 60 Hz) but requires the starting velocity model to be accurate to ¬±2.5%. We recommend for field practice that the shallowest layers of velocity models are constrained with ground-truth data. Nonetheless, FWI shows advantages over established methods, and should be considered when the characterisation of firn ice slabs is the goal of the seismic survey."
7284	Evidential	"Globally, droughts are becoming longer, more frequent, and more severe, and their impacts are multidimensional. These impacts typically extend beyond the water balance, as long-term, cumulative changes in the water balance can lead to regime shifts in land cover. Here, we assess the effects of temporal changes in water supply and demand over multiple time scales on vegetation productivity and land cover changes in continental Chile, which has experienced a severe drought since 2010. Across most of continental Chile, we observed a persistent negative trend in water supply and a positive trend in atmospheric water demand since 2000. However, in water-limited ecoregions, we have observed a negative temporal trend in the water demand of vegetation, which intensified over longer time scales. This long-term decrease in water availability and the shift in water demand have led to a decrease in vegetation productivity, especially for the Chilean Matorral and the Valdivian temperate forest ecoregions. We found that this decrease is primarily associated with drought indices associated with soil moisture and actual evapotranspiration at time scales of up to 12 months. Further, our results indicate that drought intensity explains up to 78% of temporal changes in the area of shrublands and 40% of the area of forests across all ecoregions, while the burned area explained 70% of the temporal changes in the area of croplands.  Our results suggest that the impacts of long-term climate change on ecosystems will extend to drought-tolerant vegetation types, necessitating the development of context-specific adaptation strategies for agriculture, biodiversity conservation and natural resource management."
7663	Exploratory	"Sub-Saharan Africa faces severe agricultural data scarcity amidst high food insecurity and a large agricultural yield gap, making crop production data crucial for understanding and enhancing food systems. To address this gap, HarvestStat Africa presents the largest compilation of open-access subnational crop statistics and time-series across Sub-Saharan Africa. Based on agricultural statistics collated by USAID’s Famine Early Warning Systems Network, the subnational crop statistics are standardized and calibrated across changing administrative units to produce consistent and continuous time-series. The dataset includes 546,605 records, primarily spanning from 1980 to 2022, detailing crop production, harvested areas, and yields for 33 countries and 90 crop types, including key cereals in Sub-Saharan Africa such as wheat, maize, rice, sorghum, barley, millet, and fonio. This new dataset enhances our understanding of how climate variability and change influence agricultural production, supports subnational food system analysis, and aids in operational yield forecasting. As an open-source resource, it establishes a precedent for sharing subnational crop statistics to inform decision-making and modeling efforts."
2920	Hypothetical	"Climate change is irreversibly changing the water cycle, yet existing environmental flow assessment methods often fail to recognise the non stationarity of hydro climatic systems. Failure to do so will lead to the inability of environmental water management to achieve its restoration targets. Australia has undergone major reform over the past twelve years to recover water from consumptive use for environmental benefit. This paper examines how government agencies responsible for the planning and delivery of that environmental water establish ecological objectives, whether climate change adaptations are considered important, and if not whether there is a clear rationale or barrier to adaptation. We used semi structured interviews and an online survey of staff involved in environmental water management throughout Australia, with a focus on south east Australia, to gather information on methods and perceptions regarding these key issues. The results show water management staff are aware of the general impacts climate change will have on local areas they are responsible for. However, they do not have the necessary, detailed information about how ecosystems are likely to respond to climate change to plan with confidence. There is also a lack of legislative and policy guidance as to how to deal with the potential inability to meet existing environmental targets. We conclude that environmental water planning needs to more formally incorporate climate change considerations along with modelling approaches that can evaluate outcomes under a range of possible future hydro climatic scenarios. As the industry currently exists in Australia, it is ill prepared for the challenge of meeting legislated ecological targets under future climates."
2440	Exploratory	"Quality infrastructure plays a key role in sustainable development. Achieving a harmonious relationship between humanity and nature requires better measurement, monitoring and management of environmental processes, from local to global scales. Human-caused climate change, biodiversity loss, perturbation of Earth’s biogeochemical cycles, and chemical pollution are global environmental processes where unsustainability has become evident. This report describes issues in the quality infrastructure for these processes."
7174	Hypothetical	"Quantifying and predicting precipitation and water flow and their influences is challenged by the dynamic relationships between and timing of precipitation and water fluxes. To help with these challenges, scientists use ‚Äúwater year‚Äù to examine and predict the impacts of precipitation and relevant extreme climatic and hydrological events on ecosystems. However, traditional water year definitions used in the U.S. lack a consideration of areal variation in climate and hydrology, which is needed when studying ecosystems at regional or national scales. We developed local water year (LWY) values that consider spatial variation using existing definitions whereby the water year begins in the month with the lowest or highest average monthly streamflow. We employed spatial interpolation to assign LWY start and end months to 202 subregions across the conterminous U.S. that range from 4,384 to 134,755 km2. This dataset can be linked with diverse climate, terrestrial, and aquatic data for broad-scale studies."
2360	Evidential	"As a step towards understanding the fundamental drivers of polar climate change, we evaluate contributions to polar warming and its seasonal and hemispheric asymmetries in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 6 (CMIP6) as compared with CMIP5. CMIP6 models broadly capture the observed pattern of surface- and winter-dominated Arctic warming that has outpaced both tropical and Antarctic warming in recent decades. For both CMIP5 and CMIP6, CO2 quadrupling experiments reveal that the lapse-rate and albedo feedbacks contribute most to stronger warming in the Arctic than the tropics or Antarctic. The relative strength of the polar albedo feedback in comparison to the lapse-rate feedback is sensitive to the choice of radiative kernel, and the albedo feedback contributes most to intermodel spread in polar warming at both poles. By separately calculating moist and dry atmospheric heat transport, we show that increased poleward moisture transport is another important driver of Arctic amplification and the largest contributor to projected Antarctic warming. Seasonal ocean heat storage and winter-amplified temperature feedbacks contribute most to the winter peak in warming in the Arctic and a weaker winter peak in the Antarctic. In comparison with CMIP5, stronger polar amplification in CMIP6 results from a larger albedo feedback at both poles, combined with less-negative cloud feedbacks in the Arctic and increased poleward moisture transport in the Antarctic."
2300	Evidential	"High resolution seafloor mapping shows extraordinary evidence that massive (>300m thick) icebergs once drifted >5,000km south along the eastern United States, with over 700 iceberg scours now identified south of Cape Hatteras. Sediment cores collected from several buried scours show multiple plow marks are ~31,000 years old and align with Heinrich Event 3 (H3). An accompanying set of numerical glacial iceberg simulations performed with an eddy permitting ocean model show that the transport of icebergs to these sites only occurs during massive, but short-lived, periods of elevated meltwater discharge. As H3 was associated with only a modest increase in ice-rafting across the subpolar North Atlantic, we propose that meltwater and icebergs were repeatedly routed to the subtropics during this event. Stratigraphy from subbottom data across the scour marks shows there are additional features that are both older and younger, and may align with other periods of elevated meltwater discharge. Finally, the subtropical iceberg-meltwater pathway identified supports a complex relationship between freshwater forcing and climate change given meltwater may initially be routed far to the south of deep-water formation sites."
8322	Evidential	"Historical observations of Earth's climate underpin our knowledge and predictions of climate variability and change. However, the observations are incomplete and uncertain, and existing reanalysis datasets based on these observations are derived separately for each component of the climate system, yielding inconsistencies that limit understanding of coupled climate dynamics. Here we use coupled data assimilation, which synthesizes observational and dynamical constraints across all climate fields simultaneously, to reconstruct globally resolved sea-surface temperature (SST), near-surface air temperature (T), sea-level pressure (SLP), and sea-ice concentration (SIC), over 1850‚Äì2023. We use a Kalman filter and forecasts from an efficient emulator (Linear Inverse Model; LIM) to assimilate observations of SST, land T, marine SLP, and satellite-era SIC. We account for model error by training LIMs on eight CMIP6 models, and we use the LIMs to generate eight independent reanalyses with 200 ensemble members, yielding 1600 total members. Key findings in the Tropics include post-1980 trends in the Walker circulation that are consistent with past variability, whereas the tropical SST contrast (the difference between warmer and colder SSTs) shows a distinct strengthening since 1975. ENSO amplitude exhibits substantial low-frequency variability and a local maximum in variance from 1875‚Äì1910. In polar regions, we find a muted cooling trend in the Southern Ocean post-1980 and substantial uncertainty. Changes in Antarctic sea ice are relatively small between 1850 and 2000, while Arctic sea ice declines by 0.5¬±0.1 (1œÉ) million km¬≤ during the 1920s."
1878	Exploratory	"Mixed carbonate-siliciclastic deposits provide unique insights into hydrodynamic processes that control sedimentation in tidal systems. This study presents sedimentologic an¬¨¬¨d ichnologic data from the upper Miocene¬¨ to lower Pliocene Bouse Formation, which accumulated during regional transgression at the margin of a tidal strait near the north end of the ancestral Gulf of California. The basal carbonate member of the Bouse Formation records deposition in a tide-influenced, compositionally mixed carbonate-siliciclastic system dominated by salt marsh, tidal flat, and channel environments. The basal carbonate member is an overall deepening up succession of facies associations (FA) comprising: FA1 siliciclastic-rich heterolithic facies, lime mudstone with desiccation cracks, and plant debris rich carbonate silt interpreted as siliciclastic-rich tidal flats; FA2 well-sorted gravels, siliciclastic-rich sandy strata, lime mudstone with desiccation cracks, and sandy microbial micrite interpreted as tidal-channel deposits; FA3 carbonate-rich heterolithic lime mudstone to well sorted, crossbedded bioclastic grainstone interpreted as intertidal to shallow subtidal deposits; and FA4 lime mudstone interpreted as shallow to deep subtidal low-energy deposits that record the end of tidal conditions in the basin. Trace fossils include marine forms Gyrolithes, Teichichnus, Thalassinoides, and non-diagnostic forms Arenicolites, Cochlichnus, Conichnus, Lockeia, Planolites, Skolithos, and Treptichnus (known from marine, brackish, and freshwater environments). The diminutive size of trace fossils reflects brackish conditions created by mixing of freshwater and seawater. This study provides evidence for a late Miocene to early Pliocene humid climate in southwestern North America, in stark contrast to the modern hyperarid climate. Factors that controlled the relative percent of mixed carbonate and siliciclastic sediment include siliciclastic input from local rivers, in situ carbonate production, current energy, degree of tidal mixing, and relative sea level. Pronounced facies variability at bedform, outcrop, and basin scale documented in this study appears to be an important characteristic of mixed carbonate-siliciclastic deposits in tidal depositional systems."
5485	Evidential	"Solar and wind power are central to Australia’s renewable energy future, which implies an energy sector vulnerable to weather and climate variability. Alignment of weather systems and the influence of large-scale climate modes of variability risks widespread reductions in solar and wind resources, and could induce grid-wide impacts. We therefore systematically analyse the relationship between compound solar and wind droughts with weather systems and large-scale climate modes of variability over multiple time scales. We find that compound solar and wind droughts occur most frequently in winter, affecting at least five significant energy producing regions simultaneously on 10% of days. The associated weather systems vary by season and by drought type, although widespread cloud cover and anticyclonic circulation patterns are common features. Indices of major climate modes are not strong predictors of grid-wide droughts, and are typically within one standard deviation of the mean during seasons with the most widespread events. However, the spatial imprints of the teleconnections display strong regional variations, with drought frequencies varying by more than ten days per season between positive and negative phases of climate modes in some regions. The spatial variability of these teleconnection patterns suggests that droughts in one region may be offset by increased resource in another. Our work highlights the opportunity for minimising the impact of energy production variability by utilising weather and climate intelligence. Exploiting the spatial variability associated with daily weather systems and the seasonal influence of climate modes could help build a more climate-resilient renewables-dominated energy system."
6282	Evidential	"The current generation of biogeochemical models produce large uncertainty in carbon-climate feedback projections. Structural differences in these models have been identified as a major source of inter-model uncertainties when simulating soil organic carbon (SOC) dynamics worldwide. However, parameterization could also play a role, particularly when common observational data are used to constrain model simulations. Here we demonstrate the critical role of observational data in reducing model-based uncertainty in global estimates of SOC. We applied the PROcess-guided deep learning and DAta-driven modeling (PRODA) approach to constrain both a microbial implicit model based on first-order kinetics (i.e., Community Land Model version 5, CLM5) and a microbial explicit model based on Michaelis-Menten kinetics (i.e., CarbOn cycle and Microbial PArtitioning Soil model, COMPAS) with >50,000 globally distributed SOC vertical profiles. Overall, the two constrained models predicted similar carbon transfer efficiency, baseline decomposition rate, and environmental effects on carbon fluxes. These converged model components contributed to similar SOC patterns simulated by the two structurally different biogeochemical models. Carbon input allocation and vertical transport were less constrained by SOC profile data and require other data sets to constrain. Moreover, after being constrained by SOC observations, the Michaelis constant in COMPAS tends to be much larger than its corresponding substrate concentration in SOC decomposition. Thus, the Michaelis-Menten kinetics in the COMPAS model can be approximated by multiplicative kinetics (i.e., first order with respect to both donor and received pool carbon) in these global scale simulations. Our results highlight the importance of observational data in informing model development and constraining model predictions."
4659	Definitive	"To progress decarbonisation in the United States, numerous techno-economic models have been built projecting climate change mitigation scenarios that include CO2 storage deployment at annual injection rates of 0.3 – 1.7 Gt yr-1 by 2050. However, these projections do not include geological, technical, or socio-economic factors that could impede the growth of geological storage resource use. Here, we apply a growth modelling framework to evaluate CO2 storage scenarios proposed in the Net Zero America, Carbon Neutral Pathways, Long-Term Strategy, and Decarb America reports. Our modelling framework uses logistic curves to analyse the feasibility of growth trajectories under constraints imposed by the associated storage resource availability. We show that the entire storage demand for the US can be accommodated by the resources available in the Gulf Coast alone. Deployment trajectories require sustained average annual (exponential) growth at rates >10% nationally and between 3% - 20% regionally across four storage hubs. These scale-up rates are high relative to those characterising analogous, historical, large-scale energy infrastructure projects in the US (4%), suggesting that modelled projections in current reports are too aggressive in their deployment of CCS. These models could be easily constrained to more realistic deployment trajectories with the type of modelling framework we present here."
4581	Definitive	"We present the Energy Balance Model ‚Äì Kalman Filter (EBM-KF), a hybrid model projecting and assimilating the global mean surface temperature (GMST) and ocean heat content anomaly (OHCA). It combines an annual energy balance model (difference equations) with 17 parameters drawn from the literature and a statistical Extended Kalman Filter assimilating GMST and OHCA, either observed timeseries or simulated by earth system models. Our motivation is to create an efficient and natural estimator of the climate state and its uncertainty, which we believe to be Gaussian at a global scale. We illustrate four applications: 1) EBM-KF generates a similar estimate to the 30-year time-averaged climate state 15 years sooner, or a model-simulated hindcasts‚Äô annual ensemble average, depending on the preparation of volcanic forcing. 2) EBM-KF conveniently assesses annually likelihoods of crossing a policy threshold. For example, based on temperature records up to the end of 2023, p=0.0017 that the climate state was 1.5¬∞C over preindustrial, but there is a 16% likelihood that the GMST in 2023 itself could have been over that threshold. 3) A variant of the EBM-KF also approximates the spread of an entire climate model large ensemble using only one or a few ensemble members. 4) All variants of the EBM-KF are sufficiently fast to allow thorough sampling from non-Gaussian probabilistic futures, e.g., the impact of rare but significant volcanic eruptions. This sampling with the EBM-KF better determines how future volcanism may affect when policy thresholds will be crossed and what an ensemble with thousands of members exploring future intermittent volcanism reveals."
3488	Definitive	"Landscapes created through sediment transport are shaped by the interaction of flow and form. In landscapes where wind is the agent of geomorphic work, this is clear at the small-scale; equilibrium dune morphology is linked to the wind climate and the supply of sediment. At larger scales, this linkage becomes ambiguous because the form of giant dunes and dune fields integrate long histories of varied wind and sand supply. Without a framework to assess aeolian landscape evolution at this scale, the time taken to form and reorganize dune fields has been largely unexplored quantitatively. We show that these timescales can be understood by linking modern wind and topographic datasets for one of the most expansive and morphologically diverse unvegetated dune fields, the Rub’ al Khali. By linking sediment flux to the surface area and slope of dunes, and growth to the divergence in that flux, we fully couple form and flow at the dune field-scale. Our results show quantitatively how dune field formation and reorganization are outpaced by climate change and the implications for stratigraphic interpretation."
2806	Evidential	"While radiative forcing and thus land surface temperatures have been shown to positively correlate with fire severity, precipitation, and lightning strike frequency, the effects of human activity on fire regimes remain difficult to disentangle from geophysical drivers given co-variation between these factors. Here, I analyze fire regimes in the 1919-2012 period across Canada and compare national trends to those of a latitudinal and elevational gradient in a region experiencing exponentially increased anthropogenic activity in recent decades. Located along the Canadian Rocky Mountains, the region is intended to serve as a proxy for future continental conditions under current anthropogenic trajectories. Based on the findings, I argue that, for the first time in millennia, fire regimes in the southern boreal zone have shifted on average from large, lightning-caused fires to frequent, small, human-caused fires adjacent to human transportation corridors. While warming is known to produce more severe fuel conditions, human factors such as frequent fire ignitions, active fire suppression, industrial and recreational activity, and forestry (i.e., stand aging) likely explain the reduction in mean fire size and annual area burned. Here, I provide the first evidence of a southern boreal transition to Anthropocene fire regimes without historical analogue, representing a dramatic departure from the conditions in which these forests evolved. With ~28 Pg carbon stored in Canada’s managed forests and interspecific variation in albedo, these novel fire regimes carry direct implications for the Earth’s climate system."
5146	Evidential	"Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs) have been widely studied over the past decades due to their likely link to mass extinction events. Previous work involving U-Pb zircon dating of the Deccan lava flows indicates that the main phase-2 began 250 Ka before the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) mass extinction boundary and continued into the early Danian, suggesting a cause-and-effect relationship. Closer to the eruption centre, intra-volcanic red weathered horizons known as red boles mark quiescent periods between basalt flows. Red boles have increasingly attracted the attention of researchers to understand the prevailing climatic conditions during the Deccan volcanic activity for their ability to yield crucial evidence of environmental changes triggered by volcanic activity using different geochemical proxies such as major elemental composition, bulk rock and clay mineralogy, weathering indices, paleo-precipitation estimates and stable isotope analysis. Our results indicate that red boles are characterized by concentrations of immobile elements such as Al and Fe3+ ions that are typical of paleo-laterites, which develop over short periods of weathering. Identified clay minerals consist mostly of smectite indicative of semi-arid monsoonal conditions. Weathering indices suggest intense weathering most likely linked to increasing acid rains while stable H- and O-isotope compositions suggest increasing paleoclimate instability in parallel to increased eruption rates just before the K-Pg boundary. The multi proxy approach is compatible with a cause-and-effect relationship between the Deccan Trap eruptions and the K-Pg mass extinction."
7788	Hypothetical	"In the eventuality of a major volcanic eruption or nuclear war, particles would accumulate in the stratosphere and reduce sunlight, potentially altering climate conditions severely and decreasing crop yields. Mass starvation could be prevented with the help of resilient foods, such as transforming natural gas into protein, wood into sugar, and relocating crops. One intervention not yet analysed is expanding cropland area by converting other types of land, such as pasture and second-growth forests into land that could be cultivated. We find approximately 515 million hectares would be fit for cropland expansion during a catastrophe. Three land-clearing scenarios were explored: the global-equipment-sharing scenario, in which the area fit for expansion is cleared in 12 months, feeding 39% of the global population by the end of the first year after the catastrophe; the no-equipment-trade scenario, in which 442 million hectares of land are cleared in 7 years, feeding 20% of people by the end of the first year, and the export-pool-equipment-trade scenario, where the supply of extra machinery to a few countries allows for the clearing of 511 million hectares in 7 years, feeding 27% of people by the end of the first year. This project shows the potential to mitigate starvation during catastrophes. By sparing old-growth forests, the impact on biodiversity would be limited and could mitigate desperate humans from hunting species to extinction."
8508	Hypothetical	"Understanding the formation and evolution of fast flowing ice streams is essential to projecting the centennial-scale response of ice sheets to climate forcings. Slow flowing glaciers or stagnant ice streams can slide at low velocities over a bed that is below the bulk melting point of ice, dissipating small amounts of frictional heat. This phenomenon is typically referred to as subtemperate sliding, and it complicates the assumed dichotomy between frozen and thawed beds embedded in many large-scale process-based ice sheet models. In this study, we allow for subtemperate sliding in a simple ice stream box model to investigate frictional heat dissipation at frozen ice-bed interfaces. We find that including subtemperate sliding leads to non-negligible frictional heat dissipation, which can accelerate sliding and lead to runaway acceleration of stagnant ice streams. These results suggest that subtemperate sliding and the associated thermo-frictional feedback occurs in longer timescales characterizing Heinrich events. On shorter, centennial timescales, subtemperate sliding is likely an important physical process to consider in modeling the potential reactivation of stagnant ice streams like Kamb Ice Stream."
1571	Exploratory	"Review of concepts of environmental signal (climate, tectonics, anthropogenic, etc.) propagation in sedimentary systems from source to sink."
3376	Exploratory	"Hotspots are regions of intraplate volcanism or especially strong volcanism along plate boundaries, and many of them are likely caused by underlying mantle plumes – localized hot upwellings from deep inside the Earth. It is still uncertain, whether all plumes or just some of them rise from the lowermost mantle, and to what extent and where they entrain chemically different materials. Also, large uncertainties exist regarding their size. Some plumes (such as Hawaii) create linear hotspot tracks, as the plate moves over them and can therefore serve as reference frames for plate motions, whereas others (such as Iceland) show a more complicated distribution of volcanic rocks due to variable lithosphere thickness and plume-ridge interaction. Plumes may also weaken plate boundaries and hence influence plate motions. They may influence surface features such as ice sheets, and therefore climate, but we are just beginning to study and understand processes jointly involving solid earth, hydrosphere and atmosphere."
1299	Exploratory	"Although the concept of climate is easy to understand, there is not any uncontroversial definition of it. Most definitions fall back to the simple formulation that `climate is the statistics of weather. Recent attempts at a definition called versions of this saying vague. Climate is policy-relevant, and discussions on climate and climate change benefit from clarity on the topic. Beyond the policy relevance a definition should also be valid for scientific purposes and for individual views. It has to account for a general concept and individual instances of climate. Here, I try to highlight why the flexibility and the immediacy of the colloquial definition fit the topic. This defence shifts the lack of a clear definition towards the term `weather and the time-scales separating weather and climate."
5713	Evidential	"Coherent structures are characterized in high-resolution simulations of three atmospheric boundary layers: dry convection, marine cumulus, and stratocumulus. Based on radioactive-decaying tracers emitted at different altitudes (surface, top of well-mixed layer, and cloud top), a object-oriented methodology allows individual characterization of coherent tridimensional plumes within the flow.   Each boundary layer shows updraft structures surrounded by subsiding shells that have similar thermodynamical characteristics. Well-mixed downdrafts are located relatively close to updrafts and entrain dry, warm air from the free troposphere. Identified in all boundary layers, these subsiding structures are triggered by air mass convergence linked to updrafts' divergence and are thus part of an overturning circulation in well-mixed layers. Close to the surface, downdrafts' divergence constrain updrafts' locations and thus shape a mesoscale cellular organisation with cell sizes scaling with the boundary-layer height (aspect ratio of around 2).  Active cumulus formation does not strongly perturb the spatial organisation of the sub-cloud well-mixed layer. The stratocumulus-topped boundary layer also shares similarities with the overturning circulation despite having condensation and cloud-radiation diabatic effects within the mixed layer. However, the visible mesoscale organisation of stratocumulus shows larger cells than the boundary-layer depth (aspect ratio > 10) that suggest deviations from the clear-sky conceptual view. The boundary-layer decoupling influences mass fluxes of coherent structures and thus potentially play a role in shaping the spatial organisation.  Since well-mixed downdrafts contribute to a significant part of resolved flux of heat and moisture, our results suggest that downdraft properties in well mixed layers should be represented at the subgrid scale in climate models through non-local mass-flux parameterizations."
3420	Evidential	"PURPOSE. Bioenergy with carbon dioxide removal (CDR) is increasingly presented as an efficient way to mitigate climate change. This study set out to determine under which circumstances and methodological choices CDR bioenergy systems are preferable over a reference bioenergy system from a climate change mitigation perspective. In addition, the CDR systems investigated were compared to each other. METHODS. Three systems were modelled: two CDR systems (Biochar and Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS)), with a combined heat and power (CHP) system as reference. A parametrised life cycle inventory model was developed and computed for all systems and four different functional units (FUs), resulting in distributions of climate impacts. Contribution analysis was performed, as well as a pairwise comparison of all scenarios to establish their ranking. First-order Sobol indices were computed to assess the contribution of each parameter to the variance. Whenever ranking of scenarios was largely dependent on parameter values, decision tree analysis was applied. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION. The CDR systems had a lower climate impact than CHP for most computations, across all FUs. However, when comparing the two CDR systems, the preferable system changed with FU; for heat or carbon sequestration as FU the Biochar system was preferable in general, while for electricity or biomass use as FU, the BECCS system had the lowest climate impact for most computations. For most system configurations, the contribution from energy substitutions were large and contributed to most of the variance in results. Furthermore, the ranking of systems depended on the reference activities of the background energy system. CONCLUSIONS. The results of this study indicate that the Biochar and BECCS systems are in general preferable over the reference CHP system from a climate mitigation perspective, particularly when the reference energy systems have a relatively low climate impact. However, FU and parameters affect the ranking of these three systems. RECOMMENDATIONS. When conducting a comparative LCA study for multifunctional systems, the LCA practitioner should be aware that choice of FU and specific system configurations, including reference activities, could potentially affect the climate impacts of the system, which in turn potentially affects the ranking among systems and conclusions communicated to decision makers. Conducting LCA for several FUs, with parametrised LCI, and contribution analysis, allows for a deeper analysis than traditional sensitivity analyses."
2919	Hypothetical	"Implementing environmental flows has emerged as a major restoration tool for addressing the impacts of hydrologic alteration in large river systems. The ‚Äònatural flow paradigm‚Äô has been a central guiding principle for determining important ecohydrological relationships. Yet, climate change and associated changes in rainfall run off relationships, seasonality of flows, disruptions to food webs and species life cycle cues mean these existing relationships will, in many circumstances, become obsolete. Revised thinking around setting ecological objectives is required to ensure restoration targets are achievable, particularly in regions where water scarcity is predicted to increase. Through this lens ‚Äòclimate ready‚Äô targets are those that are robust to changing water availability or incorporate future adaptation options. Future objective setting should be based around the inclusion of changing climate and water availability, and the associated species and ecosystem vulnerabilities, and expected outcomes under different policy and adaptation options. This paper uses south eastern Australia as a case study region to review the extent to which current water management plans include climate considerations and adaptation in objective setting. Results show untested climate adaptation inclusions, and a general lack of acknowledgement of changing hydrological and ecological conditions in existing management plans.  In response this paper presents a process for setting objectives so they can be considered ‚Äòclimate ready‚Äô."
3501	Evidential	"Understanding sea level during the warmest peak of the Last Interglacial (125,000 yrs ago; Marine Isotope Stage 5e) is important for assessing future ice-sheet dynamics in response to climate change, and relies on the measurement and interpretation of paleo sea-level indicators, corrected for post-depositional vertical land motions. The coasts and continental shelves of northeastern Australia (Queensland) preserve an extensive Last Interglacial record in the facies of coastal strandplains onland and fossil reefs offshore. However, there is a discrepancy (amounting to tens of meters) in the elevation of sea-level indicators between offshore and onshore sites. Here, we assess the influence of geophysical processes that may have changed the elevation of these sea-level indicators since the Last Interglacial. We modeled sea-level change due to: i) dynamic topography; ii) glacial isostatic adjustment, and iii) isostatic adjustment due to coral reef loading, which we term ""reef isostasy"". These processes caused relative sea-level changes on the order of, respectively, 10 m, 5 m, and 0.3 m since the Last Interglacial. Of these geophysical processes, the dynamic topography predictions most closely match the tilting observed between onshore and offshore sea-level markers. However, we found that these combined geophysical processes cannot explain the full amplitude of the observed discrepancy between onshore and offshore sea-level indicators."
2145	Definitive	"Many tropical forestlands are experiencing changes in land-tenure regimes, but how these changes may affect deforestation rates remains ambiguous. Using Brazil’s uniquely comprehensive land-tenure and deforestation data and quasi-experimental methods, we analyzed causal effects of six alternative tenure regimes on deforestation across 49 spatiotemporal scales corresponding to distinct regional-historical contexts. We find that poorly defined public tenure regimes increased deforestation relative to any alternative regime in most contexts. Private tenure often reduced this deforestation, but did so less effectively and less reliably than alternative well-defined regimes, except in remote regions where on-the-ground governance is limited and there are extensive environmental policies. Directly privatizing conservation regimes or indigenous lands, in turn, would most likely increase deforestation. Our cross-scale synthesis informs how conservation, titling, and other tenure-intervention policies may align with climate-change, biodiversity, and broader environmental sustainability goals and are directly relevant to ongoing political debates regarding land privatization/protection in Amazonia."
1792	Definitive	"Reducing methane emissions from the oil and gas sector is a key component of climate policy in the United States. Methane leaks across the supply chain are stochastic and intermittent, with a small number of sites (‘super-emitters’) responsible for a majority of emissions. Thus, cost-effective emissions reduction critically relies on effectively identifying the super-emitters from thousands of well sites and millions of miles of pipelines. Conventional approaches such as walking surveys using optical gas imaging technology are slow and time-consuming. In addition, several variables contribute to the formation of leaks such as infrastructure age, production, weather conditions, and maintenance practices. Here, we develop a machine learning algorithm to predict high-emitting sites that can be prioritized for follow-up repair. Such prioritization can significantly reduce the cost of surveys and increase emissions reductions compared to conventional approaches. Our results show that the algorithm using logistic regression performs the best out of several algorithms. The model achieved a 70% accuracy rate with a 57% recall and a 66% balanced accuracy rate. Compared to the conventional approach, the machine learning model reduced the time to achieve a 50% emissions mitigation target by 42%. Correspondingly, the mitigation cost reduced from $85/t CO2e to $49/t CO2e."
8266	Hypothetical	"Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a critical technology to mitigate climate change by reducing atmospheric CO‚ÇÇ. The Paran√° Basin, with its extensive basaltic formations, offers potential for large-scale CO‚ÇÇ storage. However, determining the most favorable areas for CCS remains challenging due to the complex interplay of geological, geochemical, and logistical factors. This study addresses this gap by developing a favorability map for CO‚ÇÇ storage in the Serra Geral Group basalts within the Paran√° Basin, focusing on the western region of the State of Santa Catarina, Brazil. Using the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (Fuzzy AHP), we integrated multiple criteria, including geological, geochemical, and emissions sources data. Key findings indicate that the northern and eastern areas of the region exhibit the highest favorability for CO‚ÇÇ storage, driven by optimal porosity-permeability values and proximity to significant CO‚ÇÇ emitters. This study provides a detailed favorability map highlighting optimal areas for CCS, offering valuable insights for future exploration and investment. The results advance CCS technology in basaltic formations and contribute to climate change mitigation by identifying the most promising sites for effective carbon storage."
6188	Evidential	"Losses and gains in canopy cover of the world’s tree canopies affect carbon stocks, species habitats, water cycles, and human livelihoods. Consistent and multi-decadal global data on tree-canopy cover dynamics are needed for modelling climate scenarios, tracking progress towards restoration targets, and diverse other research, management and policy applications. However, most data only map binary ‘forest’/‘non forest’ distinctions that are regionally restricted or biassed by data gaps, and those mapping tree-canopy cover are limited to the 21st century, leaving longer-term dynamic in tree-canopy cover largely unknown. Here, we present an annual and global time-series of tree-canopy cover between 1992 and 2018. To develop these data, we integrated complementary products, using their respective strengths to compensate for weaknesses, and exploiting path dependencies in change processes to derive predictions into the data-sparse 1990s. Our model validation indicates we can accurately map tree-canopy cover (r2=0.95 [±0.01], RMSE=6.75% [±0.08], F1-score=0.97 [< ±0.01]) and our time-series show plausible broad-scale spatiotemporal patterns, as indicated by high correlations with national statistics (r2=0.94 [< ±0.01]). Our analysis of these data revealed systematic global losses in tree-canopy cover that, area-wise, substantially exceed concurrent losses or gains of treescape extents. Our analysis and data provide novel insights into global dynamics of tree cover, and can support modelling and reporting in the scope of the Kunming-Montréal Global Biodiversity Framework, the Paris Agreement, and other forest-related policies."
3556	Definitive	"Paleodischarge estimation is largely undertaken within fluvial settings, and there are limited paleodischarge estimates specifically from delta deposits, despite their significance globally. Making water paleodischarge estimates for deltas using catchment-based approaches developed using data from fluvial settings requires estimation of parameters from the rock record (e.g. paleotemperature, paleoslope, paleorelief) that may be difficult to determine, and may lead to under- or over-estimation of paleodischarge values due to differences in process-form relationships between alluvial rivers and deltas. When a sediment-conveying fluvial channel starts to debouch into a standing body of water, delta lobes develop through repeating mouth bar deposition due to flow deceleration, forming a deltaic morphology with distributary channel networks that differ morphologically from those developed in unidirectional flowing alluvial rivers. This study provides empirical relationships determined across five climate regions, using 3823 measurements of distributary channel width from 66 river deltas alongside their bankfull discharge, by applying the concept of hydraulic geometry. Empirical relationships are developed from the global delta dataset between bankfull discharge and catchment area (Qb-A) and also bankfull discharge and distributary channel width (Qb-w). These empirical relationships produce very strong statistical correlations, especially between Qb and w, across different climate regions (Qb = 0.34w1.48, R2 = 0.77). However, both Qb-A and Qb-w relationships have outliers that may be explained by particular hydrological or geomorphic conditions. These new empirical relationships derived from modern systems are applied to Cretaceous outcrops (Ferron Sandstone, Dunvegan and McMurray formations). The comparatively simple scaling relationships derived here produced paleodischarge estimates within the same order of magnitude as the paleodischarge values derived from existing, more complex approaches. Our study contributes to source-to-sink investigations by enabling paleodischarge estimates that intrinsically account for climate impacts on channel geometry at the time of deposition, using measurements of channel width or catchment area of a deltaic outcrop."
7892	Hypothetical	"Despite only 0.3% of Antarctica being ice-free, those areas harbor diverse small organisms such as tardigrades, nematodes, and rotifers. The habitats of these cryptic organisms face threats from human activity, climate change, and pollution. Biodiversity surveys are essential for managing their protection and such surveys have been proven well possible in Antarctica using environmental DNA (eDNA) analysis. Early eDNA research had greatly benefited from high-throughput sequencing using the now obsolete 454 pyrosequencing technique, which at the time offered superior read length to the Illumina platform. In a 2011-12 expedition to the remote Prince Charles Mountains we had collected soil samples, from which we amplified and described 18S Ribosomal 1 RNA gene sequences. Recently we reanalysed concomitantly generated 454-derived Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit 1 (“COI”) amplicons from those soils, making use of now updated reference data. From our “historic” 454 data we now can provide additional records for some Antarctic taxa, including tardigrades Acutuncus antarcticus and Macrobiotus hufelandi, the nematodes Plectus frigophilus and Plectus murrayi, and rotifers such as Habrotrocha angularis. We show that reanalysing past eDNA projects can yield novel information as reference data collections grows, at the same highlighting the need to curate and further expand those data collections using voucher specimen."
4555	Evidential	"Floods determine river behaviour in time and space. Yet quantitative measures of discharge variability from geological stratigraphy are sparse, even though they are critical to understand landscape sensitivity to past and future environmental change. Here we show how storm-driven river floods in the geologic past can be quantified, using Carboniferous stratigraphy as an exemplar. The geometries of dune cross-sets demonstrate that discharge-driven disequilibrium dynamics dominated fluvial deposition in the Pennant Formation of South Wales. Based on bedform preservation theory, we quantify dune turnover timescales and hence the magnitude and duration of flow variability, showing that rivers were perennial but prone to flashy floods lasting 4-16 hours. This disequilibrium bedform preservation is consistent across 4 Ma of stratigraphy, and coincides with facies-based markers of flooding, such as mass-preservation of woody debris. We suggest that it is now possible to quantify climate-driven sedimentation events in the geologic past, and reconstruct discharge variability from the rock record on a uniquely short (daily) timescale, revealing a formation dominated by flashy floods in perennial rivers."
3304	Evidential	"Sand seas are vast expanses of Earth‚Äôs surface containing large areas of aeolian dunes‚Äîtopographic patterns manifest from above-threshold winds and a supply of loose sand. Predictions of the role of future climate change for sand-sea activity are sparse and contradictory. Here we examine the impact of climate on all of Earth‚Äôs presently-unvegetated sand seas, using ensemble runs of an Earth System Model for historical and future Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) scenarios. We find that almost all of the sand seas decrease in activity relative to present-day and industrial-onset for all future SSP scenarios, largely due to more intermittent sand-transport events. An increase in event wait-times and decrease in sand transport is conducive to vegetation growth. We expect dune-forming winds will become more unimodal, and produce larger incipient wavelengths, due to weaker and more seasonal winds. Our results indicate that these qualitative changes in Earth‚Äôs deserts cannot be mitigated."
3067	Definitive	"Heat conditions in North America in summer 2021 exceeded prior heatwaves by margins many would have considered impossible under current climate conditions. Associated severe impacts highlight the need for understanding the heatwave’s physical drivers and relations to climate change, to improve the projection and prediction of future extreme heat risks. Here, we find that slow- and fast-moving components of the atmospheric circulation interacted, along with regional soil moisture deficiency, to trigger a 5-sigma heat event. Its severity was amplified ~40% by nonlinear interactions between its drivers, likely driven by land–atmosphere feedbacks catalyzed by long-term regional warming and soil drying. Since the 1950s, global warming has transformed the event’s peak daily regional temperature anomaly from virtually impossible to a presently-estimated ~200-yearly occurrence. Its likelihood is projected to increase rapidly with further global warming, possibly becoming a 10-yearly occurrence in a climate 2°C warmer than preindustrial, which may be reached by 2050."
6033	Exploratory	"The Lake Suigetsu sediment cores exemplify a high-quality archive of palaeoclimatic change in East Asia during the past 150 ka. Robust interpretation of stable isotope-based proxy reconstructions from the Suigetsu cores can be aided by a greater understanding of the factors affecting the isotope composition of the lake and how it relates to that of precipitation. Here we use extended contemporary monitoring to establish the factors affecting the stable isotope composition (_18O, _2H and d-excess) of precipitation, river water and lake water in the catchment surrounding Lake Suigetsu, central Japan. We show that the composition of precipitation is influenced by the dual East Asian Monsoon system, producing minima in _18O and _2H and semi-annually varying d-excess values across the year. These signals are then transferred to the lake system, where they are combined with secondary local influences on lake water composition: homogenisation with existing catchment waters, a catchment transit lag, the interaction with saline water from the nearby Sea of Japan, and evaporative enrichment during summer. Our observations suggest that the palaeo-isotope composition of Lake Suigetsu was closely related to the behaviour of the East Asian Monsoon. We highlight lake stratification and proxy seasonality as critical components of signal interpretation."
3450	Exploratory	"California has experienced increased instances of extreme wildfire behavior in recent years, but the extent to which this is due to anthropogenic warming has been difficult to determine. Here we quantify empirical relationships between temperature and the risk of extreme daily wildfire growth (>10,000 acres) in California and use these relationships to estimate how extreme growth risk is changing under anthropogenic warming. We subject fires from 2003 to 2020 to differing background climatological temperatures and aridity metrics and find that the fraction of the risk of extreme daily growth attributable to anthropogenic warming to date averages 19% but varies substantially depending on whether background warming pushed fires over critical aridity thresholds. When the historical fires from 2003 to 2020 are subjected to projected end-of-century temperatures, the expected frequency of extreme daily growth events increases by 59% under an emissions scenario in line with the Paris Agreement, compared to an increase of 172% under a very high emissions scenario."
2914	Definitive	"‚ÄúBottom-up‚Äù methods are increasingly used to assess the vulnerability of water systems to climate change. Central to these methods is the climate ‚Äústress test‚Äù, where the system is subjected to various climatic changes to test for unacceptable outcomes. We present a framework for climate stress testing on a monthly timestep, suitable for systems whose dominant dynamic is seasonal or longer (eg. water resource systems with carry-over storage). The framework integrates multi-site stochastic climate generation with perturbation methods and in-built rainfall runoff modelling. The stochastic generation includes a low frequency component suitable for representing multi-annual fluctuations. Multiple perturbation options are provided, ranging from simple delta change through to altered seasonality and low frequency dynamics. The framework runs rapidly, supporting comprehensive multi-dimensional stress testing without recourse to supercomputing facilities.  We demonstrate the framework on a large water resource system in southern Australia.  The Matlab/Octave framework is freely available for download from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5617008."
2233	Definitive	"As the ambition and urgency of climate mitigation efforts across the U.S. increase, annual estimates of national CO2 emissions provide only vague and outdated information about changes and progress.  Using near-real-time activity data compiled from numerous sources, here we present and analyze daily, state-level estimates of fossil fuel CO2 emissions from January 2019 through December 2020. Our results quantify the abrupt but temporary decreases in emissions due to the COVID-19 pandemic (particularly related to transportation in April and May of 2020), but also reveal substantial variations across states according to the stringency of their public health responses. We also find that decreases in commercial demand for natural gas and electricity were partially but not fully offset by increases in residential demands in most places. Further, the carbon intensity of electricity and the share of electricity from coal decreased in many states in the first half of 2020 as compared to 2019, but then rebounded in the second half of 2020 when natural gas prices increased. In the future, as COVID-related restrictions dissipate and energy infrastructure evolves, our data and methods will allow state policymakers and energy analysts to closely monitor emissions trends, decarbonization progress and more quickly adjust policies and programs."
3381	Exploratory	"By 2050, over half the world's population will live in water-stressed areas. Medium-term drought forecasting can help planners avoid ``day-zero'' events and adapt to climate change. Machine learning-based precipitation-runoff modelling enables the prediction of surface water flow using only the meteorological record of a water basin.  In this work, we extend a Bayesian LSTM precipitation-runoff model with graph convolutions based on hydrological basin adjacency to predict reservoir water availability for sixty-six reservoirs in India. Employing a"
1271	Evidential	"The Dead Sea Deep Drilling Project allowed to retrieve a continuous sedimentary record spanning the two last glacial cycles. This unique archive, in such an extreme environment, has allowed for the development of new proxies and the refinement of already available paleoenvironmental studies. In particular, the interaction of the lake and sediment biosphere with elements and minerals that constitute paleoclimatic proxies has been emphasized. Although life is pushed to its extremes in the Dead Sea environment, several studies have highlighted the impact of microbial activity on this harsh milieu. The paradox is that the identity and means of adaptation of these organisms are largely ignored. We also know relatively little on the way this extreme ecosystem has evolved with time, and how it will react to growing pressure. Constraining this gap should allow to gain precision on the use of paleoenvironmental studies, and also assess the impact of human activity and climate change on a rare ecosystem. In this study, we use halite, the main evaporitic phase during arid periods in the Dead Sea basin and extract ancient DNA from their fluid inclusions, in order to characterize the ancient life of the Holocene Dead Sea. With the aid of an accurately designed protocol, we obtained fossil bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA gene sequences that illustrate that the main microbial actors of the present Dead Sea have been present in the lake for a relatively long period, emphasizing the stability of this extreme environment. Additionally, we show that current phylotypes of the deep biosphere are present within the obtained fluid inclusions sequences, which would support seeding of the deep biosphere from the water column. Finally, we shed light on putative new actors of the sulfur cycle involving both archaea and bacteria, which could play an unexpected role in the reduction of sulfur species. Together, these data provide new research avenues for both geologists and biologists working in this extreme environment, and help understanding the evolution of the Dead Sea ecosystem with time."
2798	Exploratory	"The early Eocene was characterised by much higher temperatures and a smaller equator-to-pole surface temperature gradient than today. Comprehensive climate models have been reasonably successful in simulating many features of that climate in the annual average. However, good simulations of the seasonal variations, and in particular the much reduced Arctic land temperature seasonality and associated much warmer winters, have proven more difficult. Further, aside from an increased level of greenhouse gases, it remains unclear what the key processes are that give rise to an Eocene climate, and whether there is a unique combination of factors that leads to agreement with available proxies. Here we use a very flexible General Circulation Model to examine the sensitivity of the modelled climate to differences in CO2 concentration, land surface properties, ocean heat transport, and cloud extent and thickness. Even in the absence of ice or changes in cloudiness, increasing the CO2 concentration leads to a polar-amplified surface temperature change because of increased water vapour and the lack of convection at high latitudes. Additional low clouds over Arctic land generally decreases summer temperatures and, except at very high CO2 levels, increases winter temperatures, thus helping achieve an Eocene climate. An increase in the land surface heat capacity, plausible given large changes in vegetation and landscape, also decreases the Arctic land seasonality. In general, various different combinations of factors -- high CO2 levels, changes in low-level clouds, and an increase in land surface heat capacity -- can lead to a simulation consistent with current proxy data."
3186	Definitive	"Carbonate rocks are highly reactive and presumably have higher ratios of chemical weathering to total denudation relative to most other rock types. Their high chemical reactivity affects the first-order morphology of carbonate-dominated landscapes and their sensitivity to climate. However, there have been few efforts to quantify the partitioning of denudation into physical erosion and chemical weathering in carbonate landscapes such that their sensitivity to changing climate and tectonic conditions and its effect on topography remains elusive. Here, we compile bedrock and catchment-average cosmogenic calcite-36Cl denudation rates and compare them to weathering rates. Local bedrock lowering and weathering rates are comparable, ~20 – 40 mm/ka, whereas catchment-average rates, which exist only for the Mediterranean, are ~2.7 times higher. This discrepancy is lower than the 15-fold difference in silicate-rich rocks illustrating that elevated weathering rates make denudation more spatially uniform in carbonate-dominated landscapes. Catchment-average denudation rates correlate well with topographic relief and hillslope gradient. Comparing these results with weathering rates shows that mechanical erosion processes contribute ~50% of denudation in southern France and ~70% in Greece and Israel. Our results indicate that the partitioning between largely slope-independent chemical weathering and slope-dependent mechanical erosion varies based on climate and tectonics. In humid, slowly uplifting regions, carbonates are associated with low-lying, flat topography because slope-independent chemical weathering dominates denudation. In contrast, in more arid climates with rapid rock uplift rates, carbonate rocks form steep mountains that facilitate rapid, slope-dependent mechanical erosion required to compensate for inefficient chemical weathering coupled with runoff loss to groundwater systems."
7376	Evidential	"Anthropogenic methane emissions are the second most important contributor to climate change, and their rapid reductions could help decrease near-term warming. Solid waste emits methane through the decay of organic material, which amounts to about 10% of total anthropogenic methane emissions. Satellite instruments enable monitoring of strong methane hotspots, including many strongly emitting urban areas that include landfills as most prominent sources. We present a survey of methane emissions from 151 individual waste disposal sites across six continents using high-resolution satellite observations. We find that managed landfills and dumping sites show similar levels of emission and our satellite-based estimates generally show no correlation with reported or modeled emission estimates. This reveals major uncertainties in the current understanding of methane emissions from waste-disposal sites, warranting further investigations to reconcile bottom-up and top-down approaches. We also emphasize how high-resolution satellite observations can help pinpoint where emissions originate within a facility, which often aligns with the area where waste is added. Our results highlight the potential of high-resolution satellite observations to detect and monitor methane emissions from the waste sector globally, providing actionable insights to help improve emission estimates and focus mitigation efforts."
4892	Evidential	"The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) is one of the leading modes of interannual climate variability in the tropical Indian Ocean (IO). Paleoclimate provides real climate scenarios to examine IOD behaviors and the linkage to basic states. Based on 18 models from the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project phase 3 and 4 (PMIP 3/4), the IOD change from the preindustrial period to mid-Holocene is investigated. The multimodel mean reveals that the IOD variability weakens by 14% as measured by the standard deviation of the Dipole Mode Index, which is defined using the zonal sea surface temperature (SST) difference. Such attenuation is dominated by the spatially consistent suppression in the western-pole SST variability, while the eastern pole contributes little due to the opposite-signed changes in its northwestern and southeastern portions. The primary reason for the aforementioned changes comes from the altered climatic background, which displays a positive IOD-like pattern during IOD growing seasons, with intensified westward currents along the equator and northwestward currents in the southeastern equatorial IO. Such changes in the mean-state currents modulate the strength of the IOD-related anomalous advection and subsequently cause alterations in the IOD variability. Further analyses show that the IOD attenuation in the mid-Holocene is likely irrelevant to the concurrently subdued El Niño–Southern Oscillation in the tropical Pacific because of the diminished connections between the two oscillations themselves. The above simulated changes in both the IO mean climatology and IOD variability agree well with the available paleo-records in literature."
2620	Exploratory	"Time series reconstruction methods---used to generate gap-free time series of satellite observations---were historically designed for sensors with frequent image acquisitions. Since 2008, interest in leveraging time series methods has shifted from sensors such as AVHRR and MODIS to Landsat because of free, higher-resolution data availability and improved access to high-performance compute systems. Existing methods are typically designed for specific applications such as land cover classification or for estimating the timing of phenology events.Moreover, approaches developed for specific ecological systems, such as tropical forests or temperate agriculture, often do not generalize well across land cover, vegetation, and climate types. In this study, we introduce a dynamic temporal smoothing (DTS) method to reconstruct sparse, noisy signals into dense time series at regular intervals. The DTS is a weighted smoother with dynamic parameters that is applied over a signal. The smoother is intended to have wide applicability, with particular focus on applications in vegetation remote sensing. In this paper we present and illustrate the DTS over short- and long-term Landsat (TM, ETM+, and OLI) time series and demonstrate the effectiveness of robust gap-filling over a range of landscapes in the South American Southern Cone region."
2124	Definitive	"Changes in lake status are often interpreted as palaeoclimate indicators due to their dependence on precipitation and evaporation. The Global Lake Status Database (GLSDB) has since long provided a standardised synopsis of qualitative lake status over the last 30,000 14C years. Potential sources of uncertainty however are not recorded in the GLSDB. Here we present an updated and improved relational-database framework that incorporates uncertainty in both chronology and the interpretation of palaeoenvironmental data. The database uses peer-reviewed palaeolimnological studies to produce a consensus on qualitative lake-status histories, whose chronologies are revised and standardized through the recalibration of radiocarbon dates and the application of Bayesian age-depth modelling for stratigraphic archives. Quantitative information on absolute water-level elevation is preserved if available from geomorphological sources. We also propose a new probabilistic analytical framework that accounts for these uncertainties to reconstruct synoptic, integrated environmental signals. The process is based on a Monte Carlo algorithm that iteratively samples individual lake-status histories within the limits of their uncertainties to produce many possible scenarios. We then use Recursively-Subtracted Empirical Orthogonal Function analysis to extract dominant patterns of lake-status variability from these scenarios. As a proof of concept, we apply this framework to 67 sites in eastern and southern Africa whose lake-status histories cover part of the late Pleistocene and/or Holocene. We show that, despite the sometimes large temporal and interpretation uncertainties, and the inclusion of highly discontinuous lake-status time series, identifying the major known millennial-scale climatic phases during the last 20,000 years is possible. Our framework was also able to identify an antiphased response between the lake basins in eastern and interior southern Africa to these changes. We propose that our new database and methodology framework serves as a template for efficient lake-status data synthesis, encourages the incorporation of lake-status data in more palaeoclimate syntheses, and expands the possibilities for the use of such data in the evaluation of climate models."
2928	Evidential	"Wildfires have increased in frequency and severity over the past two decades, threatening to undo substantial air quality improvements. We investigate the effect of wildfire smoke exposure on learning outcomes across the US using standardized test scores from 2009-2016 for nearly 11,700 school districts and satellite-derived estimates of daily smoke exposure. Relative to a school year with no smoke, average cumulative smoke-attributable PM2.5 exposure during the school year (‚àº35 ¬µg/m^3) reduces test scores by ‚àº 0.15% of a standard deviation. These impacts are more pronounced among younger students and are observed across differing levels of economic disadvantage and racial-ethnic composition. Additionally, we project that smoke PM2.5 exposure in 2016 reduced discounted future earnings by nearly $1.7 billion ($111 per student). Roughly 80% of these costs are borne by disadvantaged districts. Our findings quantify a previously unaccounted for social cost of wildfire that is likely to worsen under a warming climate."
3094	Evidential	"International climate goals require over 5 gigatons/year (Gt/year) of CO2 to be removed from the atmosphere by midcentury. Macroalgae mariculture has been proposed as a strategy for such carbon dioxide removal (CDR). However, the global potential for seaweed cultivation has not been assessed in detail. Here, we develop and use a dynamic seaweed growth model, the Global MacroAlgae Cultivation MODeling System (G-MACMODS), to estimate potential yields of four different types of seaweed worldwide, and test the sensitivity of these estimates to uncertain biophysical parameters under two nutrient scenarios (one in which the surface ocean nutrient budget is unaltered by the presence of seaweed farms, and another in which seaweed harvest is limited by nutrients that are resupplied by vertical transport). We find that 1 Gt of seaweed carbon could be harvested in 0.8% of global exclusive economic zones (EEZs; equivalent to ~1 million km2) if farms were located in the most productive areas, but potential harvest estimates are highly uncertain due to ill-constrained seaweed mortality and nitrogen exudation rates. Our results suggest that seaweed farming could produce climate-relevant quantities of biomass carbon and highlight key uncertainties to be resolved by future research."
2802	Evidential	"Projections of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are critical to better understanding and anticipating future climate change under different socio-economic conditions and mitigation strategies. The climate projections and scenarios assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, following the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP)-Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) framework, have provided a rich understanding of the constraints and opportunities for policy action. However, the current emissions scenarios lack an explicit treatment of urban emissions within the global context. Given the pace and scale of urbanization, with global urban populations expected to increase from about 4.4 billion today to about 7 billion by 2050, there is an urgent need to fill this knowledge gap. Here, we estimate the share of global GHG emissions emanating from urban areas from 1990 to 2100 based on the SSP-RCP framework. The urban GHG emissions are presented in five regional aggregates and are based on a combination of the urban population share, 2015 urban per capita CO2eq emissions, SSP-based national CO2eq emissions, and recent analysis of urban per capita CO2eq trends. We find that urban areas account for the majority of global GHG emissions in 2015 (61.8%). Moreover, the urban share of global GHG emissions progressively increases into the future, exceeding 80% in some scenarios by the end of the century. The combined urban areas in Asia and Developing Pacific, and Developed Countries account for 65.0% to 73.3% of cumulative urban emissions between 2020 and 2100 across the scenarios. Given these dominant roles, we describe the implications to potential urban mitigation in each of the scenario narratives in order to meet the goal of climate neutrality within this century."
1553	Evidential	"Antarctic Peninsula (AP) ice core records indicate significant accumulation increase since 1855, and any resultant ice mass increase has the potential to contribute substantially to present-day Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA). We derive empirical orthogonal functions from climate model output to infer typical spatial patterns of accumulation over the AP and, by combining with ice core records, estimate annual accumulation for the period 1855-2010. In response to this accumulation history, high resolution ice-sheet modeling predicts ice thickness increases of up to 45 m, with the greatest thickening in the northern and western AP. Whilst this thickening is predicted to affect GRACE estimates by no more than 6.2 Gt/yr, it may contribute up to -7 mm/yr to the present-day GIA uplift rate, depending on the chosen Earth model, with a strong east-west gradient across the AP. Its consideration is therefore critical to the interpretation of observed GPS velocities in the AP."
4560	Hypothetical	"Solutions to large-scale environmental and social challenges require radical collaboration that blends technology and people ‚Äî and the Open science movement is answering that call by transforming how we work together. While often the focus is on data, publications, code, software developers, and researchers, the transition to Open involves investment across agencies and organizations of all kinds. One critical and often-overlooked part of transitioning to Open is that it requires support from managers and leadership, who do not need to be Open science experts but who can imagine the return on investment and support their teams through time and resources to learn new skills and technologies, take risks, and even fail through the process. In this paper we describe our work developing the Openscapes Flywheel with NASA Earth science data centers, using the concept where transformations occur from relentlessly pushing a giant, heavy flywheel that builds momentum over time. We offer three practical ways managers can support their teams and grow morale and technical capacity across their organizations: (1) Engage bright spots, through welcoming them and creating space and place; (2) Empower a learning culture through, investing in learning and trust and working openly (3) Amplify Open science leaders, through leveraging the common and inspiring the bigger movement. Together these lessons create kinder and more inclusive organizations that are more resilient as data volumes increase and software evolve, and dispel the hero myth of science. Engaging, empowering and amplifying efforts to support people while modernizing our workforce is the way that we will meet the world‚Äôs greatest challenges, from climate change to social justice to democracy. We can already see how working this way increases inclusion, reproducibility, and resilience within and across government, academic, and non-profit organizations, and are hopeful for what we can do together in growing this movement."
5324	Evidential	"The pursue of a higher-resolution gridded climate data and weather forecast requires an unprecedented number of surface observations to model the sub-mesoscale. National meteorological services (NMS) have practical and financial limitations to the number of observations it can collect, therefore, opening the door to crowdsourced weather initiatives might be an interesting option to mitigate data scarcity. In recent years, scientists have made remarkable efforts at assessing the quality of crowdsourced collections and determining ways these can add value to the ‚Äúdaily business‚Äù of NMS. In this work, we develop and apply a multi-fidelity spatial regression method capable of combining official observations with crowdsourced observations, which enables the creation of high-resolution interpolations of weather variables. The availability of a sheer volume of crowdsourced observations also poses questions on what is the maximum weather complexity that can be modelled with these novel data sources. We include a structured theoretical analysis simulating increasingly complex weather patterns that uses the Shannon-Nyquist limit as a benchmark. Results show that the combination of official and crowdsourced weather observations pushes further the Shannon-Nyquist limit, thus indicating that crowdsourced data contributes at monitoring sub-mesoscale weather processes (e.g. urban scales). We think that this effort illustrates well the potential of crowdsourced data, not only to expand the current range of products and services at NMS, but also opening the door for high-resolution weather forecast and monitoring, issuing local early warnings and advancing towards impact-based analyses."
2978	Exploratory	"The maturation of geological CCS along the Norwegian Continental Shelf is ongoing in the Norwegian North Sea, however, more storage sites are needed to reach climate mitigation goals by 2050. In order to augment the Aurora site and expand CO2 storage in the northern Horda Platform, regional traps and seals must be assessed to better understand the area‚Äôs potential. Here, we leverage wellbore and seismic data to map storage aquifers, identify structural traps, and assess possible top and fault seals associated with Lower and Upper Jurassic storage complexes in four major fault blocks. With respect to trap and seal, our results maintain that both prospective intervals represent viable CO2 storage options in various locations of each fault block. Mapping, modeling, and formation pressure analyses indicate that top seals are present across the entire study area, and are sufficiently thick over the majority of structural traps. Across-fault juxtaposition seals are abundant, but dominate the Upper Jurassic storage complexes. Lower Jurassic aquifers, however, are often upthrown against Upper Jurassic aquifers, but apparent across fault pressure differentials and moderate to high shale gouge ratio values correlate, suggesting fault rock membrane seal presence. Zones of aquifer self-juxtaposition, however, are likely areas of poor seal along faults. Overall, our results provide added support that the northern Horda Platform represents a promising location for expanding CO2 storage in the North Sea, carrying the potential to become a future injection hub for CCS in northern Europe."
3088	Definitive	"Projections of precipitation from global climate models are crucial for risk assessment and adaptation strategies under different emission scenarios, yet model uncertainty limits their application. Here, we assess inter-model differences by separating the response of precipitation to anthropogenic forcing within 21 individual, bias-adjusted CMIP6 models using a pattern filtering technique. The forced response of mean precipitation, the number of wet days and the intensity and frequency of daily extremes are identified using low-frequency component analysis. Inter-model agreement in the sign of local change is moderate across land areas, with better agreement for extreme metrics (90\% of models agree on 51, 41, 61, 61\% of land area, for each metric respectively). Differences in the average magnitude of local changes are also large but can be explained well by the magnitude of global surface warming, despite model differences in the sign of local change (R^2 of 0.81, 0.79, 0.69, 0.79). Moreover, we show that these temperature-precipitation scaling relationships can be identified robustly within individual climate models from inter-temporal changes in the detected forced response (median R^2 of 0.82, 0.82, 0.76, 0.87). Inter-model spread in these relationships is considerable (coefficient of variation of 22, 33, 26, 17%), thus diagnosing a source of the uncertainty in the magnitude of projected precipitation change. These results suggest that despite uncertainty in the sign of regional change, the magnitude of future precipitation changes is well constrained by temperature-scaling relationships both across and within models. They may offer a new avenue to constrain the magnitude of future projections."
5549	Definitive	"The relative contributions of anthropogenic climate change and internal variability in sea level rise from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet are yet to be determined. Even the way to address this question is not yet clear, since these two are linked through ice-ocean feedbacks and probed using ice sheet models with substantial uncertainty. Here we demonstrate how their relative contributions can be assessed by simulating the retreat of a synthetic ice sheet setup using an ice sheet model. Using a Bayesian approach, we construct distributions of sea level rise associated with this retreat. We demonstrate that it is necessary to account for both uncertainties arising from both a poorly-constrained model parameter and stochastic variations in climatic forcing, and our distributions of sea level rise include these two. These sources of uncertainty have only previously been considered in isolation. We identify characteristic effects of climate change on sea level rise distributions in this setup, most notably that climate change increases both the median and the weight in tails of distributions. From these findings, we construct metrics quantifying the role of climate change on both past and future sea level rise, suggesting that its attribution is possible even for unstable marine ice sheets."
3210	Evidential	"The economic impact of dry and wet spells is increasingly investigated, also relative to anthropogenic climate change. Combining high-resolution wealth estimates and long-run (1901-2018) hydrological records for nearly one million settlements , here we empirically estimate the long-run welfare impact of hydrological events in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). To achieve causal identification, we adopt a generalised propensity score approach allowing for continuous longitudinal treatments. Our results suggest that hydrological events played a long-lasting impact in shaping the current wealth distribution patterns in SSA. While even moderate dry spells diminished wealth (on average -$110 in the local per-capita GDP for each additional dry month), only extreme wet spells show a significant impact, but this is significantly harsher (-$387). We examine the temporal variability of estimates and discuss the significance of adaptive capacity. Our findings support the consideration of adaptation investment to mitigate future impacts and an exacerbation of existing inequalities."
5412	Evidential	"Climate change and unabated greenhouse gas emissions are increasing the possibility that the world will turn to climate intervention to curb ever-increasing global temperatures. To date, most work on this topic has imagined that an international organization like the United Nations or an international coalition of states will synchronize their efforts to deploy climate intervention at ideal latitudes to maximize global effect. Nearly all climate model simulations run-to-date have assumed this. Thus, our understanding of the science of climate intervention is largely based on an ideal of perfect geopolitical coordination. However, geopolitical uncertainties make this scenario unlikely and the costs of climate intervention are sufficiently low that many states could comfortably finance a climate intervention program that could have global consequences. This paper uses game theory to elucidate the conditions that might make a state more or less likely to begin unilateral climate intervention (UCI). We solve this game for several specific scientific, economic, and climatological conditions that change the likelihood of a government starting its own climate intervention program without the participation of the broader international community. Specifically, we demonstrate that the plausibility of UCI is linked to our scientific understanding of three key elements: (1) the effectiveness of climate intervention strategies, (2) the sensitivity of specific governments to punishment by other states, and (3) satisfaction with climate and weather in the present. We conclude by discussing how this formal game theory model informs the design of future earth system model simulations of UCI, international agreements related to climate intervention, and the development of solar climate intervention technologies."
1695	Hypothetical	"The response of tropical ecosystems to elevated carbon dioxide (CO$_2$) remains a critical uncertainty in projections of future climate. Here we investigate how leaf trait plasticity in response to elevated CO$_2$ alters projections of tropical forest competitive dynamics and functioning. We use vegetation demographic model simulations to quantify how plasticity in leaf mass per area and leaf carbon to nitrogen ratio alter the responses of carbon uptake, evapotranspiration, and competitive ability to a doubling of CO$_2$ in a tropical forest. Observationally constrained leaf trait plasticity in response to CO$_2$ fertilization reduces the degree to which tropical tree carbon uptake is affected by a doubling of CO$_2$ (up to -14.7\% as compared to a case with no plasticity; 95\% confidence interval $CI_{95\%}$ -14.4 to -15.0). It also diminishes evapotranspiration (up to -7.0\%, $CI_{95\%}$ -6.4 to -7.7), and lowers competitive ability in comparison to a tree with no plasticity. Consideration of leaf trait plasticity to elevated CO$_2$ lowers tropical ecosystem carbon uptake and evapotranspirative cooling in the absence of changes in plant type abundance. However, ‚Äòplastic‚Äô responses to high CO$_2$ which maintain higher levels of plant productivity are potentially more competitively advantageous, thus, including changes in plant type abundance may mitigate these decreases in ecosystem functioning. Models that explicitly represent competition between plants with alternative leaf trait plasticity in response to elevated CO$_2$ are needed to capture these influences on tropical forest functioning and large-scale climate."
2249	Exploratory	"Our current understanding of climate and its relationship to fires is generally confined to the recent past where instrumental records and satellite imagery are available. Speleothem records of past environmental change provide a unique opportunity to explore fire frequency and intensity in the past, and the antecedent climatic conditions leading to fire events. Here, we compare fire sensitive geochemical signals in a stalagmite from Yonderup Cave, a shallow cave in Western Australia, where well-documented wildfire events have occurred in recent decades. Principal component analysis of the stalagmite time-series revealed distinct peaks in a combination of phosphorus and metal (aluminium, zinc, copper and lead) concentrations, interpreted to have come from ash, in response to known fire events. This method is extended to identify fires during the growth interval of the speleothem (1760 CE–2005 CE). We identify lower and less variable peak phosphorus concentrations in the pre-European period that are consistent with low-intensity cultural burning by Indigenous Australians. We also identify an intense wildfire event occurring around 1897 ± 5 CE. The combination of climate and fire sensitive proxies in the speleothem indicates that this wildfire was preceded by a multi-decadal dry period. We interpret that post-fire changes in surface-cave hydrology resulted from heat-induced deformation of the shallow karst bedrock brought about by the intensity of this fire. These findings have implications for the interpretation of speleothem records from shallow caves in fire-prone climates and show the potential for speleothems to provide records of fire intensity and recurrence intervals. Further development of these records could lead to a better understanding of the climate-fire relationship and the effects of land-management practices on wildfire frequency and intensity."
1719	Definitive	"Despite widespread use of branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (brGDGTs) for paleo-temperature reconstruction, no global calibration for their application in lakes has been generated since improved analytical methods have allowed for the separation of the structural isomers. This is a substantial obstacle for the application of this tool as soil calibrations underestimate temperature values when applied to lake sediments. Here, we present a comprehensive dataset (N = 261) of lacustrine brGDGT distributions spanning a wide range of geographical locations, environmental temperatures, and lakewater pH values. Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) analysis on the fractional abundance of brGDGTS indicates that temperature exerts a strong control (explaining 86% of the variance) on the lipid distribution. However, the influence of water chemistry is less clear, as pH and conductivity have a weak influence on brGDGT distributions. We use our dataset to generate a new Bayesian temperature calibration, which has an R_= 0.85 and RMSE = 2.8°C. Application of this new calibration to a previously published lake core record demonstrates that it generates values comparable with instrumental observations. Our new calibration facilitates the use of lacustrine brGDGTs to reconstruct continental temperatures, a vital piece of information for understanding past climates."
5642	Definitive	"Coral reefs are threatened by multiple stressors that have driven a decline in the cover of reef-building coral species, resulting in a loss of reef structure and function. Restoration reef science provides useful conservation tools to preserve and restore the key species and ecological functions of these ecosystems. However, gaps remain in restoring ecosystem functions at large scales. This study provides a guide of how to invest and apply innovative solutions and immediate action strategies from the tourism-hotel sector in alliance with academia and key stakeholders, Throught development and implementation of a multi-species restoration program at two sites in the Mexican Caribbean: Manchoncitos Reef, Riviera Maya and La Francesita Reef, Cozumel. Where we have identified effective propagation and outplanting techniques for key critically endangered species, as well as genotypes resistant to temperature stress and Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD). We include a comparative analysis over time (2020-2022) showing positive ecological processes and recovery of ecological functions reflected in increased coral cover, structural complexity and fish biomass. We have genetic stock available in two nurseries to develop education, research, technological innovation, recreation and tourism activities. Baseline assessment of the study areas will make it possible to adapt repopulation techniques not only for hard corals, but also to advance in the comprehensive restoration of the ecosystem to incorporate new elements to the reef, such as fish, crab or sea urchin postlarvae that accelerate herbivory functions and in turn improve the natural processes of the coral reefs, allowing for a return to equilibrium. The project will improve the understanding of the use of restoration as a tool for climate change adaptation especially in collaboration with the private sector."
7391	Exploratory	"Seasonal streamflow forecasts are an important component of flood risk management. Hybrid forecasting methods that predict seasonal streamflow using machine learning models driven by climate model outputs are currently underexplored, yet have some important advantages over traditional approaches using hydrological models. Here we develop a hybrid subseasonal to seasonal streamflow forecasting system to predict the monthly maximum daily streamflow up to four months ahead. We train a random forest machine learning model on dynamical precipitation and temperature forecasts from a multimodel ensemble of 196 members (eight seasonal climate forecast models) from the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) to produce probabilistic hindcasts for 579 stations across the UK for the period 2004-2016, with up to four months lead time. We show that multi-site ML models trained on pooled catchment data together with static catchment attributes are significantly more skilful compared to single-site ML models trained on data from each catchment individually. Considering all initialization months, 60% of stations show positive skill (CRPSS>0) relative to climatological reference forecasts in the first month after initialization. This falls to 41% in the second month, 38% in the third month and 33% in the fourth month."
5140	Evidential	"The Puget Sound Coastal Storm Modeling System (PS-CoSMoS) is a tool designed to dynamically downscale future climate scenarios (i.e., projected changes in wind and pressure fields and tem-perature) to compute regional water levels, waves, and compound flooding over large geographic areas (100s of kilometers) at high spatial resolutions (1 m) pertinent to coastal hazard assessments and planning. This research focuses on advancing robust and computationally-efficient approaches to resolving the coastal compound flooding components for complex, estuary environments and its application to the Puget Sound region of Washington State (USA) and greater Salish Sea. The modeling system provides coastal planners with projections of storm hazards and flood exposure for recurrence flood events spanning the annual to 1-percent-annual chance flood, necessary to manage public safety and the prioritization and cost-efficient protection of critical infrastructure and valued ecosystems . The tool is applied and validated for Whatcom County, Washington, includes a cross-shore profile model (XBeach) and overland flooding model (SFINCS) and is nested in a regional tide-surge model and wave model. Despite uncertainties in boundary conditions, hindcast simulations performed with the coupled model system accurately identified areas that were flooded during a recent storm in 2018. Flood hazards and risk are expected to increase ex-ponentially as sea level rises in the study area of 210 km of shoreline. With 1 meter of sea-level rise, annual flood extents are projected to increase from 13 to 33 km2 (5 and 13% of low-lying Whatcom County) and flood risk (defined in USD) is projected to increase fifteenfold (from 14 to 206 million USD). PS-CoSMoS, like its prior iteration in California (CoSMoS), provides valuable coastal hazard projections to help communities plan for the impacts of sea level rise and storms."
1504	Evidential	"Sediment flux signals in foreland basins preserve a record of tectonics, sea level and climate through erosion and sedimentation. However, longitudinal sediment transport often occurs in foreland basin, thus removing part of the orogenic material flux from foreland basins. Here we use mass balance calculation and stratigraphic simulations of sediment fluxes for the Taiwan orogen to provide a quantified order of magnitude estimate of how much orogenic material may bypass a foreland basin. Our results indicate a significant, potentially more than 50%, mismatch between sediment volume currently preserved in the basin and the amount of material eroded from the orogen since the onset of collision in Taiwan. This supports previous paleogeographic work suggesting that longitudinal sediment transport in the paleo-Taiwan Strait served as a bypass conduit important for the establishment of a steady state orogen. We identify candidate submarine topography in the South China Sea that may preserve Taiwans missing erosional mass."
4893	Definitive	"Black carbon is the largest contributor to global aerosol‚Äôs shortwave absorption in the current atmosphere and is an important positive climate forcer. The complex refractive index, m = mr + imi, the primary determinant of the absorbed and scattered energies of incident radiation per unit volume of particulate material, has not been accurately known for atmospheric black carbon material. An accurate value at visible wavelengths has been difficult to obtain due to the black carbon‚Äôs wavelength-scale irregularity and variability of aggregate shape, distribution in particle size, and mixing with other aerosol compounds. Here, we present a method to constrain a plausible (mr, mi) domain for black carbon from the observed distribution of the complex forward-scattering amplitude S(0¬∞). This approach suppresses the biases due to the above-mentioned complexities. The S(0¬∞) distribution of black carbon is acquired by performing single particle S(0¬∞) measurements in a water medium after collecting atmospheric aerosols into water. We demonstrate the method operating at Œª = 0.633 Œºm for constraining the refractive index of black carbon aerosols in the north-western Pacific boundary layer. From the plausible (mr, mi) domain consistent with the observed S(0¬∞) distributions and the reported range of mass absorption cross-section, we conservatively select 1.95+0.96i as a recommendable value of the refractive index for uncoated black carbon at visible wavelengths. The recommendable value is 0.17 larger in mi than the widely used value 1.95+0.79i in current aerosol-climate models, implying a ~16% underestimate of shortwave absorption by black carbon aerosols in current climate simulations."
2794	Definitive	"Although nature-based solutions for urban heat mitigation have gained momentum, it is important to quantitatively assess the feasibility of such strategies to utilize space efficiently and prioritize lower-income communities, who have fewer options for climate change adaptation. Here we combine data from US census estimates, satellites, and satellite-derived products to develop a framework to target potentially suitable areas for urban afforestation to mitigate urban heat and minimize tree cover disparity. We test this framework for California, the most populated state in the US and the 5th largest economy (by GDP) in the world, and show that space exists for an additional 34 million (1.2 million acres of) trees in the state’s urban areas. This would reduce the average urban land surface temperature (LST) by 1.7 °C and provide multiple co-benefits totaling $1.1 billion annually, including reduction in heat-related medical visits (>3000 over 10 years) and 3.9 million metric tons of annual CO2 sequestration. Without any intervention to reduce urban LST, the net present value of the social cost of carbon from residential electricity use ranges from $12.9 million to $102.1 million. Because funding is limited, we provide suitability scores for urban afforestation at the census block group (CBG) scale based on multiple considerations. In California for instance, equitable urban afforestation in CBGs with positive suitability scores will serve 89% of the ≈9 million urban residents in the lowest income quartile for their cities. This method can guide equitable urban afforestation efforts and can be scaled to other North American cities."
1881	Evidential	"Constraints on the evolution of atmospheric CO2 levels throughout Earth’s history are foundational to our understanding of past variations in climate. Despite considerable effort, estimates of past CO2 levels do not always converge. Here we reconstruct atmospheric CO2 values across major climate transitions over the past 17 million years using the boron isotopic composition (_11B) of planktic foraminifera from 89 samples obtained from two sites in the West Pacific Warm Pool, Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Sites 806 and 807. These sites are in a region that today is in equilibrium with the atmosphere, despite equatorial divergence, and is likely to have been in equilibrium with the atmosphere for the interval studied. We use high-precision multi-collector inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry and show that data from these sites can reproduce the ice core record. Estimates of early Miocene pCO2 are generally higher than published reconstructions from other sites, while values for the Pliocene and Pleistocene are more similar to other datasets. We find evidence for reductions in pCO2 of ~280 µatm during the Middle Miocene Climate Transition, ~270 µatm during Pliocene Glacial Intensification, and ~50 µatm during the Mid-Pleistocene Climate Transition. There is possible evidence for a larger reduction in glacial pCO2 during the Mid-Pleistocene Transition compared to interglacial pCO2, and a minimum in pCO2 during glacial MIS 30. Our results are consistent with a strong coupling between pCO2, temperature and ice sheet expansion throughout the past 17 million years."
4708	Hypothetical	"Satellite remote sensing is transforming coastal science from a ‘data-poor’ field into a ‘data-rich’ field.  Sandy beaches are dynamic landscapes that change in response to long-term pressures, short-term pulses, and anthropogenic interventions.  Until recently, the rate and breadth of beach change has outpaced our ability to monitor those changes, due to the spatiotemporal limitations of our observational capacity. Over the past several decades, only a handful of beaches worldwide have been regularly monitored with accurate yet expensive in-situ surveys.  The long-term coastal-change data of these few well-monitored beaches have led to in-depth understanding of many site-specific coastal processes.  However, because the best-monitored beaches are not representative of all beaches, much remains unknown about the processes and fate of the other >99% of unmonitored beaches worldwide.  The fleet of Earth-observing satellites has enabled multiscale monitoring of beaches, for the very first time, by providing imagery with global coverage and up to daily frequency.  The long-standing and ever-expanding archive of satellite imagery will enable coastal scientists to investigate coastal change at sites vulnerable to future sea-level rise, i.e., (almost) everywhere.  In the past decade, our capability to observe coastal change from space has grown substantially with computing and algorithmic power.  Yet, further advances are needed in automating monitoring using machine learning, deep learning, and computer-vision to fully leverage this massive treasure-trove of data.  Extensive monitoring and investigation of the causes and effects of coastal change at the requisite spatiotemporal scales will provide coastal managers with additional, valuable information to evaluate problems and solutions, addressing the potential for widespread beach loss due to accelerated sea-level rise, development, and reduced sediment supply.  Monitoring from Earth-observing satellites is currently the only means of providing seamless data with high spatiotemporal resolution at the global scale of the impending impacts of climate change on coastal systems."
4732	Exploratory	"ccurate assessment of the Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR) and Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) at the crop level is paramount for accurately assessing the energy balances and the crop yield under agrivoltaic systems. The shadings produced by the photovoltaic modules and structures of the agrivoltaic systems cause a non-homogeneous distribution of PAR and GHI at the crop level. It is thus essential to calculate their distribution at a high spatial resolution within the agrivoltaic field. Using field data and commercial software, we have validated a high spatial resolution model (i.e., 25 cm √ó 25 cm) for PAR and GHI distribution within a vertical agrivoltaic system. The results show good model accuracy with coefficients of determination higher than 0.98 when comparing GHI from the model developed in this study and commercial software based on ray tracing. Model applications are presented with consideration to the computation of surface temperature, evapotranspiration, crop yield, and soil moisture. The model developed in this study shows good agreement in terms of crop yield computations as compared to a previously published model for agrivoltaic systems simulations and optimization (Campana et al., 2021). The added value of the model presented in this study consists in performing high spatial resolution computations of microclimatic parameters and crop yield within the agrivoltaic field."
5662	Evidential	"Overexploitation of groundwater threatens groundwater-bound aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity and ecosystem stability, underscoring the need to devise appropriate mitigation strategies. Yet, substantial scientific evidence that mitigation measures effectively protect groundwater ecosystems is presently nonexistent. We provide unique and compelling evidence, using counterfactual artificial intelligence and ground truth data, that mitigation measures can successfully sustain ecologically sensitive spring flows and ensure the sustainability of groundwater-bound threatened and endangered endemic species and consumptive groundwater uses under a changing climate."
1507	Hypothetical	"Watersheds are the fundamental organizing units in landscapes and thus the controls on drainage divide location and mobility are an essential facet of landscape evolution. Additionally, many common topographic analyses fundamentally assume that river network topology and divide locations are largely static, allowing channel profile form to be interpreted in terms of spatio-temporal patterns of rock uplift rate relative to base level, climate, or rock properties. Recently however, it has been suggested that drainage divides are more mobile than previously thought and that divide mobility, and resulting changes in drainage area, could potentially confound interpretations of river profiles. Ultimately, reliable metrics are needed to diagnose the mobility of divides as part of routine landscape analyses. One such recently proposed metric is cross-divide contrasts in chi, a proxy for steady-state channel elevation, but cross-divide contrasts in a number of topographic metrics show promise. Here we use a series of landscape evolution simulations in which we induce divide mobility under different conditions to test the utility of a suite of topographic metrics of divide mobility and for comparison with natural examples in the eastern Greater Caucasus Mountains, the Kars Volcanic Plateau, and the western San Bernadino Mountains. Specifically, we test cross-divide contrasts in mean gradient, mean local relief, channel bed elevation, and chi all measured at, or averaged upstream of, a reference drainage area. Our results highlight that cross-divide contrasts in chi only faithfully reflect current divide mobility when uplift, rock erodibility, climate, and catchment outlet elevation are uniform across both river networks on either side of the divide, otherwise a chi-anomaly only indicates a possible future divide instability. The other metrics appear to be more reliable representations of current divide motion, but in natural landscapes, only cross-divide contrasts in mean gradient and local relief appear to consistently provide useful information. Multiple divide metrics should be considered simultaneously and across-divide values of all metrics examined quantitatively as visual assessment is not sufficiently reliable in many cases. We provide a series of Matlab tools built using TopoToolbox to facilitate routine analysis."
7722	Evidential	"Human-induced climate change, marked by frequent and severe climate hazards, damages water and sanitation facilities, limiting safe and independent access for people with disabilities. In Bangladesh, where 8% of the population has a disability, the challenges are heightened by climate hazards, including cyclones and floods.  Evidence on how these hazards affect the sanitation experiences of people with disabilities and their caregivers is limited. This study aimed to explore the impacts of climate hazards on the sanitation experiences of people with disabilities in Bangladesh, along with the impacts of management strategies in response to them and their caregivers. This mixed-methods study combined a nationwide population-based survey across 32 districts and a qualitative in-depth assessment across two districts (cyclone-prone Satkhira and flood-prone Gaibandha) of Bangladesh. The survey used the Washington Group Short Set on Functioning to identify 1021 people with and 909 without disabilities, comparing their access to sanitation facilities during climate hazards. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and multivariable analyses. The qualitative assessment included 39 people with disabilities and 16 caregivers through purposive and snowball sampling. Methods were in-depth interviews, photovoice ranking, and accessibility audits, with data analyzed thematically. The survey found that 77% of participants had access to basic sanitation, mainly through pit latrines (47%). 13% of households reported damage to sanitation facilities due to climate hazards, and leading issues included waste overflow during floods (49%) and structural collapse or slab breakage during cyclones (57%). Qualitative findings revealed that both people with disabilities and caregivers sustained injuries while accessing or supporting access to sanitation facilities during and after climate hazards due to muddy, slippery and inaccessible paths.   The survey also found that 45% of people used alternative sanitation facilities during climate hazards. Additionally, 21% of them reported changing their sanitation behaviours due to using alternative sanitation. Common changes in behaviours included restricting their use of sanitation facilities (61%), limiting or restricting food intake (30%), and fluid intake (9%). There was some evidence that people with disabilities changed sanitation-related behaviours more during floods (AOR 3.83, 0.99-14.86 95%CI, p=0.052) than those without disabilities. Qualitative data showed flood-affected individuals with disabilities in Gaibandha faced verbal abuse using relative or neighbour’s facilities and resorted to open defecation. Privacy concerns and increased reliance on caregivers led to limiting toileting and adjusting food and water intake, especially for women. In Satkhira, cyclone-affected individuals continued using damaged facilities to avoid humiliation despite contact with human waste. In sub-group analysis of cyclone-affected populations, people with disabilities experiencing incontinence had a 74% lower likelihood of using alternative sanitation facilities than individuals without incontinence (AOR 0.26, 0.07-0.93 95%CI, p=0.038). Damaged facilities led some participants to defecate in clothes and bedding, resulting in faecal contact for both of them and their caregivers and increased physical and emotional stress for caregivers.  This study underscores the challenges faced by people with disabilities and their caregivers due to climate hazards, stressing the need for targeted interventions to promote climate-resilient inclusive sanitation facilities and participation of people with disabilities in disaster planning."
8805	Definitive	"Human activities are expected to delay the next glacial inception because of the long atmospheric lifetime of anthropogenic CO2. We present the first Earth system model simulations for the next 200,000 years with dynamic ice sheets and interactive atmospheric CO2, exploring how emissions will impact a future glacial inception. Historical emissions (500 PgC) are unlikely to delay inception, expected to occur under natural conditions around 50,000 years from now, while a doubling of current emissions (1000 PgC) would delay inception for another 50,000 years. Inception is generally expected within the next 200,000 years for emissions up to 5000 PgC. Our model results show that assumptions about the long-term balance of geological carbon sources and sinks has a strong impact on the timing of the next glacial inception, while millennial-scale AMOC variability influences the exact timing. This work highlights the long-term impact of anthropogenic CO2 on climate."
3589	Evidential	"Air quality and climate change are substantial and linked sustainability challenges, and there is a need for improved tools to assess the implications of addressing them in combination. High-fidelity chemistry-climate simulations can capture combined climate-air quality responses to policy change, but computational cost has prevented integration of accurate air quality impacts into integrated assessment models (IAMs) used to inform policy development.  Instead, IAMs often use global- or regional-scale marginal response factors to calculate air quality impacts of climate scenarios. To bridge this gap, we develop a computationally-efficient approach to quantify air quality impacts of combined climate and air quality interventions, capable of capturing spatial heterogeneity and complex atmospheric chemistry. We fit individual response surfaces to high-fidelity model simulation output for 1,525 locations worldwide under a variety of perturbation scenarios. Our intermediate-fidelity approach captures known differences in atmospheric chemical regimes, and can estimate location-by-location air quality under different scenarios within milliseconds. It can also be straightforwardly implemented in IAMs, enabling researchers to rapidly estimate how air quality in different locations, and related equity-based metrics, will respond to large-scale changes in emissions policy.  Using this approach we find that the sensitivity of air quality to climate change and air pollutant emissions reductions differs in sign and magnitude by region, suggesting that calculations of “co-benefits” of climate policy that do not account for the existence of simultaneous air quality interventions can lead to inaccurate conclusions. Although reductions in global mean temperature are effective in improving air quality in many locations and sometimes yield compounding benefits, we show that the air quality impact of climate policy depends on air quality precursor emissions stringency.  Our approach can be extended to include results from higher-resolution modeling, but also to incorporate other interventions towards sustainable development which interact with climate action and have spatially-distributed equity dimensions."
6624	Evidential	"River floodplains can be both sources and sinks for organic carbon. In the sedimentary record, geochemical signatures of terrestrial water availability record climate and ecology along river corridors in deep time. However, paleoenvironmental reconstructions are often confounded by the complex dynamics of organic carbon residence, entrainment, and deposition in a fluvial system. As alluvial rivers migrate across their sedimentary basins, they erode older deposits, integrating their environmental record with that of other sediment in transport. Transported organic carbon deposited on floodplains integrates environmental information over spatiotemporal scales associated with sediment mobilized from the entire catchment. Carbon production from plant communities on stable floodplains contribute information about the local climate and ecology. If catchment-averaged, environmental signals may be integrated over more than ~106 years; if local, they may be integrated over just ~104 years. River dynamics therefore fundamentally impact the spatiotemporal scales of integration of environmental information encoded within the organic carbon stored on their floodplains. We used physical experiments to explore how river kinematics impact the time over which organic carbon can accumulate on floodplain surfaces. We found that doubling the ratio of water to sediment flux caused the most stable parts of the floodplain to remain immobile for twice as long. In situ carbon accumulated on stable floodplains can therefore integrate significant amounts of local environmental information along with catchment-averaged information. Conversely, in situ organic carbon that accumulates on dynamic floodplains in systems with relatively high sediment fluxes predominantly records basin-averaged information but relatively small amounts of local information. Changes in river dynamics during past thermal events on Earth, linked to changes in the hydrological cycle and alterations in water and sediment fluxes, can be expected to alter the duration over which organic carbon can accumulate on Earth’s river floodplains and therefore the spatial and temporal scales to which climate reconstructions apply."
5184	Evidential	"Water temperature is a key feature of freshwater ecosystems but comprehensive datasets are severely lacking, a limiting factor in research and management of freshwater species and habitats. An existing statistical stream temperature model developed for British Columbia, Canada, was refit to predict August mean stream temperatures, a common index of stream thermal regime also used in thermalscapes developed for the western US. Thermalscapes of predicted August mean stream temperature were produced for 680,000 km of stream network at approximately 400 m intervals. Temperature predictions were averaged for 20-year periods from 1981-2100 to produce 86 scenarios: one for each historical period (i.e., 1981-2000, 2001-2020), and 21 for each future period (i.e., six global climate models and an ensemble average under three representative concentration pathways). The final model performance was consistent with other published regional-scale statistical models (R^2 = 0.79, RMSE = 1.53¬∞C, MAE = 1.18¬∞C), particularly given the relative paucity of data, large geographic extent, and range of climatic and physiographic conditions. Model results suggested an average increase of August mean stream temperature of 2.9 ¬± 1.0¬∞C (RCP 4.5 ensemble mean ¬± SD) by end of century, with significant heterogeneity in predicted temperatures and warming rates across the province. Compared to stream temperature predictions from the western US, the predictions for BC showed good agreement at cross-border streams (Pearson‚Äôs r = 0.91), suggesting the possible integration of both products for a full western North America thermalscape. These stream thermalscapes for British Columbia address a major data deficiency in freshwater ecosystems and have potential applications to stream ecology, species distribution modelling, and evaluation of climate change impacts."
2482	Definitive	High-resolution geochemical and sedimentological data have been obtained for a lacustrine sediment record from Lagoa Dourada (South Brazil). Four distinctly different depositional processes were determined: (1) Suspension fallout of fine-grained minerogenic particles transferred via fluvial activity dominates the Early Holocene and relates to open grassland in the catchment area; (2) Activation of the karst hydrological system with deposition of massive sand layers indicates increased precipitation at the onset of the Middle Holocene; (3) Minerogenic sediments are replaced by organic deposition due to wetter climatic conditions with the expansion of woodlands in combination with release of dissolved nutrients due to enhanced pedogenesis during the Middle to Late Holocene; (4) Human-induced land-use change caused destabilization of soils in the catchment area with resulting cultural soil erosion between AD 1800 and 1950. These depositional trends are linked to intensity variations of the South American Monsoon System (SAMS). Century-long climatic events detected by data of high-resolution XRF scanning confirm this relationship and provide signals of the 8.2 and 4.2 ka events as well as of the Little Ice Age. These events document increased rainfall with complex responses of the environmental system. Our SAMS-induced consequences of past hydroclimatic variability on the environment of South Brazil provide background information for better evaluating model projections of future climate change.
2322	Definitive	"Meteorite impacts load the atmosphere with dust and cover the Earth‘s surface with debris. They have long been debated as a trigger of mass extinctions through Earth‘s history. Impact winters generally last <100 years, whereas ejecta blankets persist for 10^3-10^5 years. Here we show that only meteorite impacts that emplaced ejecta blankets rich in K-feldspar (Kfs) correlate to Earth system crises (n=11, p<0.000005). Kfs is a powerful ice-nucleating aerosol yet is normally rare in atmospheric dust mineralogy. Ice nucleation plays an important role in cloud microphysics, which modulates global albedo. A conceptual model is proposed whereby the anomalous prevalence of Kfs is posited to have two key effects on cloud dynamics: 1) reducing the average albedo of mixed-phase cloud, which effected a hotter climate; 2) weakening of the cloud albedo feedback, which increased climate sensitivity. These mechanisms offer an explanation as to why this otherwise benign mineral is correlated so strongly with mass extinction events: every K-feldspar-rich ejecta blanket corresponds to a severe extinction episode over the past 600 Myr. This model may also explain why many kill mechanisms only variably correlate with extinction events through geological time: they coincide with these rare periods of climate destabilization by atmospheric Kfs."
5009	Definitive	"Heat waves are broadly expected to increase in severity and frequency under climate change. Case studies highlight a number of physical mechanisms that play a role in present-day heat waves, which typically occur during a coalescence of anomalous atmospheric and land surface conditions. However, a unified model of heat wave physics is lacking, primarily owing to difficulty in disentangling the forcing versus feedback roles of soil moisture and atmospheric variability. Here, we provide observational evidence that soil moisture modulation of heat waves is a generic feature of midlatitude continental climates, and develop a theoretical framework to understand this modulation. Using separation of timescales we derive a diagnostic equation for the nonlinear response of temperature to soil moisture variations, and a dynamical Hasselmann-like model for the soil moisture variations themselves. We find that soil moisture fluctuations control the frequency and intensity of temperature extremes by slowly altering the background state on which rapid atmospheric variability acts, rather than by altering atmospheric variability itself. We also find the slow soil moisture variations are well-approximated as being primarily driven by stochastic precipitation variability. Our framework provides a first-principles understanding of soil moisture’s role in midlatitude temperature extremes."
7797	Evidential	"Sea level rise is one of the most alarming impacts of climate change and is projected to have devastating economic consequences for coastal communities such as increased flood damage, lost economic productivity, and decreased property values. To measure this impact in the New Jersey Meadowlands, an urban estuary ecosystem, I used a digital elevation model (DEM) to create inundation maps modeling 1, 2, and 3 ft of SLR. The DEM was combined with real estate and land use maps to assess the value of properties impacted by SLR and to identify the impacted economic sectors. Our nearest neighbor analysis revealed a negative correlation between the distance of properties of the nearest waterbody and their sale prices. Our modeling efforts indicate that the Meadowlands area will be greatly impacted by inundation from SLR with projected at-risk real-estate ranging between $1.7 – 4.3 billion between the years 2050 and 2130. Additionally, as sea levels rise, the proportion of commercial, industrial, and residential areas affected increases relative to the proportion of forests, wetlands, and open areas affected. These insights point to the severity of potential SLR impacts on the New Jersey coastal economy. It is crucial that decision-makers in the Meadowlands and beyond integrate climate change impacts, particularly SLR, into development and infrastructure planning to avoid these severe economic consequences."
6249	Evidential	"A sound understanding of plant growth is critical to maintaining future crop productivity under ongoing climate change. Remotely sensed time series of crop functional traits from optical satellite imagery are an invaluable tool for deriving appropriate management practices that facilitate risk mitigation and increase the resilience of agroecosystems. However, the availability of imagery is limited by atmospheric disturbances that cause large temporal gaps and noise in the trait time series.  Therefore, time series reconstruction methods are required for accurate crop growth modelling. Physiological priors, such as the fact that plant growth is mainly controlled by a few environmental covariates, among which air temperature plays a prominent role, represent a promising approach to improve the representation of crop growth. Here, a novel approach is proposed that combines Sentinel-2 Green Leaf Area Index (GLAI) observations with three dose response curve approaches describing the a priori physiological relationship between growth and temperature in winter wheat. A probabilistic ensemble Kalman filtering data assimilation scheme allows the combination of high temporal resolution air temperature data and satellite imagery, which also allows quantification of uncertainties.  The proposed approach requires a smaller number of satellite observations compared to conventional remote sensing time series algorithms, making it suitable for agricultural areas with high cloud cover, and is considerably less complex than a mechanistic crop growth model. Validation was carried out using in-situ data collected on winter wheat plots in Switzerland in two consecutive years. The validation results suggest that the proposed assimilation of Sentinel-2 GLAI and temperature-response-based growth rates allows the reconstruction of physiologically meaningful GLAI time series. In particular, the systematic underestimation of high in-situ GLAI values (> 5 m^2 m^-2) often prevalent in purely remote sensing driven GLAI time series reconstruction was reduced. Thus, the proposed approach is advantageous compared to state-of-the-art remote sensing approach based on wide-spread logistic functions by means of physiological plausibility, fitting requirements and representation of high in-situ GLAI values. This has great potential to increase the reliability of remotely sensed crop productivity assessment."
7308	Hypothetical	"Landfalling tropical cyclones (TCs) can produce large rainfall totals which lead to devastating flooding, loss of life, and significant damage to infrastructure. Many studies have examined future changes in TC precipitation, however few have considered changes owing to differences in the synoptic environment during landfall. Here we focus on three North Atlantic TCs that impacted the southeastern United States: Hurricanes Floyd (1999), Matthew (2016), and Florence (2018). While these storms were impactful when they occurred, how might the impacts of similar systems change in a future climate? We address these questions using a Pseudo-Global Warming (PGW) approach and ensembles of convection-allowing numerical model simulations. With this method, we compare future changes in precipitation characteristics such as accumulated rainfall and rain rate frequency and distribution to assess how these changes differ as a function of synoptic environment. Hurricanes Matthew and Floyd, which have more synoptic-scale forcing for ascent while over our study region, exhibit higher average rain rates in the present and future than the more tropical Hurricane Florence, but Florence exhibits the largest increases in rain rates (34 ¬± 12% versus 23 ¬± 9% and 21 ¬± 6% for Hurricanes Matthew and Floyd, respectively). When we consider accumulated precipitation, Hurricanes Matthew and Floyd have larger areal increases in precipitation greater than 250 mm than Florence (17600¬±800km^2 and 22400¬±400km^2 versus 9800¬±500km^2 ). These results point to the potential for future TCs in synoptically forced environments to have larger spatial footprints of heavy precipitation but smaller increases in rain rate than storms with less synoptic forcing, especially when considering over-land precipitation."
2123	Evidential	"The 2021 South Kalimantan flood was recorded as the most serious ever to have taken place in the province. It occurred due to high-intensity rain during the period 10-19 January, accompanied by a spring tide. This study provides an overview of the disaster, with reference to the hydro-meteorological conditions (topography, tides, and precipitation). The method used was the analysis of the precipitation and its monthly rainfall pattern anomalies using remote sensing data. A Digital Elevation Model (DEM) was also analyzed to indicate the most noticeably flood-affected area. In certain areas, total precipitation during the ten days reached 672.8 mm, with daily precipitation peaking at 255 mm on January 14, greater than the 25-year return period value. The flood coincided with a spring tide, which peaked at 1.21 m on the evening of January 15. Using 20-year GPM data, it was found that ENSO and IOD coexisted with both the highest and lowest anomalies. With a La Niña event at the end of 2020, a positive precipitation anomaly in 2021 was expected. The extreme precipitation is suspected to be the main driver of the 2021 South Kalimantan flood, whose impact was worsened by the spring tides. This study conducts further research on the correlation between land-use change, rainfall, spring tide and flooding in South Kalimantan. In addition, it is recommended that the government should have a better plan for the flood risk management by prioritizing areas based on vulnerability to climate hazards."
3475	Hypothetical	"Land surface and Earth System models require reliable soil maps to represent the influence of spatial variability of soil properties on ecosystem fluxes and storages. However, mapping soils using conventional in situ survey protocols is time-consuming and costly. We addressed the outdated spatial information on soil physico-chemical properties for a tropical region with a ~700-km longitudinal gradient of contrasting topography, climate, and vegetation (~98,000 km2; NE Brazil), by developing a novel hybrid machine learning framework and applying it to this region. This framework reduces prediction redundancies due to high multicollinearity by implementing a recursive feature selector algorithm for input selection; its core is composed of the Soil-Landscape Estimation and Evaluation Program (SLEEP) and a calibrated Gradient Boosting Model (GBM) capable of modeling the spatial distribution of soil properties at multiple and dynamic soil depths. The use of SLEEP and GBM allowed us to explain the spatial distribution of various soil properties and their environmental modulators. The model training and testing approach used six topographical, ten meteorological and two vegetation properties, and data from 223 soil profiles across the study area. Our models demonstrated a consistent performance with spatial extrapolations exhibiting r2 values of 0.79–0.98, and -1.39–1.14% percent bias. The properties related to topography and climate were dominating when estimating the number of soil layers, soil texture, and the sum of bases. Our framework features high flexibility and it is transferable to other tropical regions, while reducing capital investments and increasing accuracy when compared to traditional mapping protocols."
5778	Evidential	"Nonmarine rocks in sea cliffs of southern California store a detailed record of weathering under tropical conditions millions of years ago, where today the climate is much drier and cooler. This work examines early Eocene (~50-55 million-year-old) deeply weathered paleosols (ancient, buried soils) exposed in marine terraces of northern San Diego County, California, and uses their geochemistry and mineralogy to reconstruct climate and weathering intensity during early Eocene greenhouse climates. These Eocene warm spikes have been modeled as prequels for ongoing anthropogenic global warming driven by a spike in atmospheric CO2. Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum (PETM, ~55 Ma) kaolinitic paleosols developed in volcaniclastic conglomerates are evidence of intense weathering (CIA >98) under warm and wet conditions (mean annual temperature [MAT] of ~17° C ± 4.4° C and mean annual precipitation [MAP] of ~1500 ± 299 mm).  Geologically younger Early Eocene climatic optimum (EECO, 50 Ma) high shrink-swell (Vertisol) paleosols developed in coarse sandstones are also intensely weathered (CIA >80) with MAT estimates of ~20 °C ± 4.4° C but have lower estimated MAP (~1100 ± 299 mm), suggesting a less humid climate for the EECO greenhouse spike than for the earlier PETM greenhouse spike."
3327	Evidential	"As part of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6), the Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison Project for CMIP6 (ISMIP6) was devised to assess the likely sea-level-rise contribution from the Earth's ice sheets. Here, we construct an ensemble of climate forcings for Antarctica until the year 2300 based on original ISMIP6 forcings until 2100, combined with climate indices from simulations with the MIROC4m climate model until 2300. We then use these forcings to run simulations for the Antarctic ice sheet with the SICOPOLIS model. For the unabated warming pathway RCP8.5/SSP5-8.5, the ice sheet suffers a severe mass loss, amounting to ~1.5 m SLE (sea-level equivalent) for the fourteen-experiment mean, and ~3.3 m SLE for the most sensitive experiment. Most of this loss originates from West Antarctica. For the reduced emissions pathway RCP2.6/SSP1-2.6, the loss is limited to a three-experiment mean of ~0.16 m SLE. The means are approximately two times larger than what was found in a previous study (Chambers and others, 2022, doi: 10.1017/jog.2021.124) that assumed a sustained late-21st-century climate beyond 2100, demonstrating the importance of post-2100 climate trends on Antarctic mass changes in the 22nd and 23rd centuries."
4701	Evidential	"The climate feedback determines how Earth's climate responds to anthropogenic forcing. It has been more negative in recent decades than predicted by Earth system models due to a sea surface temperature `pattern effect', whereby warming is concentrated in the western tropical Pacific, where nonlocal radiative feedbacks are very negative. This phenomenon has however primarily been studied within climate models. We diagnose a pattern effect from historical records as an evolution of the climate feedback over the past five decades. The climate feedback has decreased by $0.8\pm0.5$ W/m$^2$K over the past 50 years, corresponding to a reduction in climate sensitivity. Earth system models' climate feedbacks instead increase over this period. Understanding and simulating this historical trend and its future evolution are critical for reliable climate projections."
6935	Evidential	"Tropical forest photosynthesis can decline at high temperatures due to (1) biochemical responses to increasing temperature and (2) stomatal responses to increasing vapor pressure deficit (VPD), which is associated with increasing temperature. It is challenging to disentangle the influence of these two mechanisms on photosynthesis in observations, because temperature and VPD are tightly correlated in tropical forests. Nonetheless, quantifying the relative strength of these two mechanisms is essential for understanding how tropical gross primary productivity (GPP) will respond to climate change, because increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration may partially offset VPD-driven stomatal responses, but is not expected to mitigate the effects of temperature-driven biochemical responses. We used two terrestrial biosphere models to quantify how physiological process assumptions (photosynthetic temperature acclimation and plant hydraulic stress) and functional traits (e.g. maximum xylem conductivity) influence the relative strength of modeled temperature vs. VPD effects on light-saturated GPP at an Amazonian forest site, a seasonally dry tropical forest site, and an experimental tropical forest mesocosm. By simulating idealized climate change scenarios, we quantified the divergence in GPP predictions under model configurations with stronger VPD effects compared to stronger direct temperature effects. Assumptions consistent with stronger direct temperature effects resulted in larger GPP declines under warming, while assumptions consistent with stronger VPD effects resulted in more resilient GPP under warming. Our findings underscore the importance of quantifying the role of direct temperature and indirect VPD effects for projecting the resilience of tropical forests in the future, and demonstrate that the relative strength of temperature vs. VPD effects in models is highly sensitive to plant functional parameters and structural assumptions about photosynthetic temperature acclimation and plant hydraulics."
7330	Evidential	"Managed forests, including plantation systems, play a vital and often underappreciated role in contributing to the global carbon sink and mitigating climate change, and determining the most effective mitigation strategies requires accounting methods that accurately assess the climate effects of forests. We use a dynamic life cycle assessment methodology to compare the climate effects of thirty-six forest management scenarios with varying rotation lengths for loblolly pine plantations in the southern U.S., including both in situ and ex situ greenhouse gas fluxes. We also evaluate the effectiveness of using only carbon stock estimates to assess the net climate effect of a given management strategy relative to radiative forcing metrics. Using carbon stocks as the metric, we failed to attribute management strategies with higher relative climate benefits, emphasizing the need for greenhouse gas accounting methodologies that directly represent the effect of forest management on potential atmospheric warming mitigation efforts. When radiative forcing is used for comparison, our results show that management decisions such as thinning and rotation length should be adjusted based on stand-specific conditions, and that overgeneralized strategies, such as extending rotation lengths, lowered or had little effect on climate benefits for many scenarios."
1993	Evidential	"Regional processes play a key role in the global carbon budget. Major ocean carbon uptake at mid-latitudes counteracts carbon release in the tropics, which is modulated by episodes of marine heatwaves (MHWs). Yet, we lack essential knowledge on persistent MHWs (PMHWs), and their effect on the carbon sensitive areas. Here, based on a 1985-2017 joint analysis of reconstructions, ocean reanalysis, in situ and satellite data, we show that PMHWs occur in major carbon uptake and release areas. Air-sea CO2 flux changes from PMHWs are strongest in the Pacific Ocean with a 35 +/- 2 % reduction in CO2 release in the tropics linked to ENSO, and a reduction in CO2 uptake of 28 +/- 9 % in the North Pacific. These results provide new insights into the interplay of extreme variability and a critical regulating ocean ecosystem service, and pave the way for future investigations on its evolution under climate change."
5391	Exploratory	"Satellite remote sensing is vital for research, monitoring, and policy addressing environmental-change and sustainability issues from climate and ecosystem changes to food and water security. Here, Landsat satellite data play a crucial role, thanks to their unique global, long-term, and high-resolution coverage. Yet, spatial and temporal data gaps in the Landsat archive may propagate into derived remote-sensing products and thereby threaten the validity of downstream applications, especially when data users have limited training in remote sensing. To improve awareness of these issues, we here demonstrate that global, historical Landsat data provide a spatially and temporally highly uneven, frequently interrupted, and seasonally incomplete coverage. Using a causal-discovery framework, we moreover show that these inconsistencies are inherited in several state-of-the-art, global time-series products, causing pervasive biases in perceptions of changes in tropical moist forests, arable lands, and seasonal water resources (significant biassing effects detected in 84.6-93.6% of our country-specific tests, depending on land-change facet). These biases can impair reliable analyses and monitoring of diverse environmental changes and human development issues targeted by international policy frameworks including the Kunming-Montréal Global Biodiversity Framework, the Paris Agreement, and the Sustainable Development Goals. We discuss avenues towards better uncertainty reporting and bias control in satellite-based monitoring and related applications, highlighting needed contributions from both product developers and users."
3559	Evidential	"The degassing of CO2 and S from arc volcanoes is fundamentally important to global climate, eruption forecasting, and cycling of volatiles through subduction zones. However, all existing thermodynamic/empirical models have difficulties reproducing CO2-H2O-S trends observed in melt inclusions and provide widely conflicting results regarding the relationships between pressure and CO2/SO2 in the vapor. In this study, we develop an open-source degassing model, Sulfur_X, to track the evolution of S, CO2, H2O, and redox states in melt and co-existing vapor in ascending mafic-intermediate magma. Unlike previous models, Sulfur_X describes sulfur degassing by combining separate sulfur partition coefficients for three relevant equilibria: RxnI. FeS (m) + H2O (v)_H2S (v) + FeO (m), RxnIa. FeS (m) + 1.5O2 (v) _SO2 (v) +FeO (m), and RxnII. CaSO4(m)_SO2 (v) + O2 (v) + CaO (m), based on the sulfur speciation in the melt (m) and co-existing vapor (v). Sulfur_X tracks the evolution of fO2 and sulfur and iron redox states in the system using electron balance and equilibrium calculations. Our results show that a typical H2O-rich (4.5 wt.%) arc magma with high initial S6+/_S ratio (>0.5) will degas much more (~2/3) of its initial sulfur at high pressures (> 200 MPa) than H2O-poor ocean island basalts with low initial S6+/_S ratio (<0.1), which will degas very little sulfur until shallow pressures (<50 MPa). Resulting from this new pressure-S relationship in the melt, the predicted CO2/ST evolution of co-existing vapor by Sulfur_X also provides new insights into interpreting the CO2/ST ratio measured in high-T volcanic gases."
7910	Hypothetical	"Despite widespread access to basic sanitation in Malawi, over 75% of the population lacks improved sanitation facilities. This national study investigates the resilience of pit-latrines across Malawi, focusing on the relationship between construction quality, facility lifespan, and collapse frequency. A survey of 268,000 pit-latrines revealed that high-quality latrines (lined and with a slab) collapse three times less frequently than low-quality latrines and last significantly longer. However, cost barriers remain substantial, with high-quality latrines costing five times more than low-quality facilities. Even when accounting for their extended lifespan, the annual cost of high-quality facilities is almost double that of low-quality options, highlighting a key financial challenge for widespread adoption.  Pit-latrine emptying, while offering a potential solution to extend the lifespan of latrines, is rarely practiced due to its high costs and cultural resistance. Manual emptying, the most common method, raises health and environmental concerns, while emptying costs remain prohibitively high for many households. The study emphasises the need for significant investment in resilient sanitation infrastructure, promotion of affordable emptying services, and the development of faecal waste management systems. Addressing these challenges is essential to ensuring equitable access to safe and sustainable sanitation in Malawi, ensuring climate resilience and sanitation justice."
5321	Definitive	"Climate energy balance models (EBMs) – simple energy-balance-based models of climate change – are widely used. The simplest “linear” EBM is deficient in capturing the behavior of complex climate models, so a “two-layer” model with an additional degree of complexity, i.e. two vertical layers, is typically used. Other additional degrees of complexity are equally plausible as well, however, and different approaches to add a degree complexity have not been compared quantitatively. Here we compare four types of EBMs - two-layer, order-two (temperature-dependent feedback), two-region (in space), and two-timescale (fast and slow climate responses) - specifically, their ability to capture historical temperature change and simulated temperature changes in abrupt (4x) and gradual (1%-ramp) forcing scenarios. The two-region model outperforms the others. The two-region model’s best-fit parameters to historical temperatures are also more physically plausible than the next-best-fitting model, the two-layer model. We therefore conclude that the two-region model is the preferred climate EBM."
8523	Evidential	"Globally, there is a growing societal need for multifunctional coastal climate adaptation of sandy shores in the coming decades. Sand nourishment strategies are increasingly regarded as promising nature-based approaches, as they may increase flood safety and mitigate erosion while enhancing recreational and ecological functioning. However, their multifunctional potential has not yet been assessed under diverse climate impacts at decadal scales. This study aimed to identify the effects of beach, shoreface and mega-nourishment strategies on coastal multifunctionality using a systems-based approach. We identified indicators for recreational, ecological and flood safety functions through a structured literature review, and integrated these into a process-based sand distribution model for dissipative coastal profiles. We simulated indicator states as the coastal profile responded to the nourishment strategies under five sea level rise scenarios and three erosion rates, and calculated the extent to which coastal functions and multifunctionality were supplied over six decades. We found that all three nourishment strategies could supply coastal multifunctionality to a high extent, although the drivers of this potential differed per strategy. These findings imply that sand nourishment strategies are viable approaches for multifunctional coastal climate adaption in the coming decades, that require prioritising specific coastal features and functions. While sand nourishment strategies remain high-impact interventions, they also allow for creating coastal landscapes that may not only prevent floods but also enhance the environmental and societal functions and features we desire of sandy shores worldwide."
7925	Evidential	"Upwelling in the equatorial Pacific Ocean exerts a primary influence on the Earth’s climate, but there is great uncertainty on whether this influence will intensify or weaken under global warming. The dominant dynamical theory of equatorial upwelling argues that the easterly trade winds ’pull’ water up towards the surface via Ekman suction. In contrast, studies of decadal variability suggest that the subtropical cells ’push’ equatorial upwelling from below. Therefore, it is unclear whether upwelling is ’pulled from above’ by Ekman divergence or ’pushed from below’ by geostrophic convergence. Here, we use a framework of local available energetics to study the Pacific shallow overturning circulation and find that at least 20-50% of equatorial upwelling cannot be powered directly by winds along the equator, as commonly understood. Instead, this fraction of upwelling is powered by potential energy that is transferred to the thermocline via off-equatorial downwelling and diabatic processes. Water parcels holding excess potential energy in the equatorial thermocline are able to upwell without additional energy input, such that equatorial upwelling can in fact be pushed from below. The strength of this push is largely set by the trade winds, but may also be influenced by energy sources across the subtropical ocean. Unlike previous available energetics analyses of the equatorial region, our study uses complete local conservation laws that allow us to trace all energy sources and pathways. This makes our dynamical formulation particularly useful to explain variations in equatorial Pacific upwelling at interannual and decadal timescales alike."
8517	Definitive	"The Schuylkill River, a lifeline for Philadelphia, faces intensifying stress from urbanization and increasingly severe extreme hydrometeorological events (EHMEs) driven by climate change. Understanding how urban estuarine rivers respond to EHMEs remains challenging due to limited high-resolution data and the complexness of human-modified landscapes. Here, we combine long-term hydrological records, a 1-m resolution urban landscape model, remote sensing, citizen-generated data, and advanced hydrodynamic simulations to examine the Schuylkill River's response to EHMEs, focusing on Hurricane Ida's unprecedented flood on September 1, 2021. Ida triggered the river's highest-ever recorded flow discharge of 3,367.7 m_/s—nearly 100 times its average flow. This unique dataset enabled us to build a comprehensive flood model, capturing the dynamics of urban flooding and its impacts on Philadelphia's population at the street level. Our analysis reveals that past hydrological conditions and high-resolution urban terrain models are essential for accurately resolving water pathways and identifying the most vulnerable populations during EHMEs. Furthermore, we discovered that extreme discharges in the Schuylkill have intensified over the past century, underscoring escalating flood risks for Philadelphia's residents. Our numerical experiments reveal that extremer flow discharges added to high tide conditions, working as a ""downstream water gate"", can create significant expansions of the flooded area, penetrating through Philadelphia's most densely populated neighborhood. These findings highlight the urgent need for integrated research on EHMEs in urban estuaries worldwide to enhance flood preparedness and resilience."
2852	Evidential	"Past studies on the impacts of climate change (CC) on Alpine hydropower production have focused on high-head accumulation power plants. We provide one of the first comprehensive, simulation-based studies on CC impacts on Alpine Run-of-River (RoR) production, also considering effects of environmental flow requirements and technical increase potential. We simulate future electricity production under three emissions scenarios for 21 Swiss RoR plants with a total production of 5.9 TWh a-1. The simulations show an increase in winter production (4% to 9%) and a decrease in summer production (-2% to -22%), which together lead to an annual decrease of about -2% to -7% by the end of the century. The production loss due to environmental flow requirements is estimated at 3.5% of the annual production; the largest low-elevation RoR power plants show little loss, while small and medium-sized power plants are most affected. The potential for increasing production by optimising the design discharge amounts to 8% of the annual production. The largest increase potential is related to small and medium-sized power plants at high elevations. The key results are: i) there is no linear relationship between CC impacts on streamflow and on RoR production; the impacts depend on the usable streamflow volume, which is influenced by the Flow Duration Curve, environmental flow requirements, and design discharge; ii), the simulated production impacts show a strong correlation (>0.68) with the mean catchment elevation. The plants at the highest elevations even show an increase in annual production of 3% to 23%, due to larger shares of precipitation falling as rain instead of snow. These general results are transferable to RoR production in similar settings in other Alpine locations and should be considered in future assessments. Future work could focus on further technical optimisation potential, considering detailed operational data."
7908	Exploratory	"This study investigated youths’ empowerment through EU-funded climate change projects (CCPs) and the role that social research and public engagement have in that process. The importance of considering youth empowerment in a time of climate change is increasingly recognised. Youths are exposed to interrelated health, social, economic, and political vulnerabilities caused by climate change, but they often have limited resources to address and navigate these changes. To help address these issues youth empowerment holds the potential to give youth a greater influence over their life in the context of evolving climate change. EU-funded CCPs plays a crucial role in EU’s climate mitigation and adaption policies and the implementation of these projects can have widespread implications for youth across the EU. However, despite this, there is little research that explores the local youth implications of EU-funded CCPs. In this paper we want to start addressing this knowledge gap by exploring how youth empowerment was facilitated, shaped, and restrained over a year-long collaboration with students from a Greek school as part of an EU Horizon 2020 project on social acceptance of Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCUS) technologies. The findings indicate that the activities provided the students with opportunities to explore and express different types of concerns, knowledges and perspectives on issues related to climate change, social acceptance and CCUS. However, the empowering potential of these activities were also shaped by power differentials and contestations around what types of knowledge should matter and the source of that knowledge. Although the capacity to engage with youth through Horizon 2020 resources is feasible, more longitudinal and meaningful participation is needed."
4777	Definitive	"The current status of technological advancement does not allow to generate complete flood simulations in real-time for large geographic areas. This hinders warning-systems, interactive planning tools and detailed forecasts and as a consequence  the population cannot be quickly or reliably informed of where large masses of water will flow. Our novel method computes flood hazard maps over three orders of magnitude faster than current state-of-the-art methods. It applies physically-based principles of steady-state flow to evade full dynamic aspects of flood simulations. It directly estimates the relevant information for flood hazard, such as peak flow height, velocity and flood arrival time. Performance indicators show similar or exceeding accuracy compared to traditional flow models depending on the type of event and quality of the used elevation data. In our tests, computational costs are reduced on average by a factor 1500. As a result, the developed method provides new perspective for the field of flood hazards, flood risk reduction through new types of early-warning systems, and user-interactive hazard assessment systems. As climate change is expected to aggravate flood hazard, the presented method can bring necessary efficiency to flood simulation and thereby save lives and livelihoods."
8145	Exploratory	"The global catastrophic risk (GCR) and existential risk (ER) literature focuses on analysing and preventing potential major global catastrophes including a human extinction event. Over the past two decades, the field of GCR/ER research has grown considerably. However, there has been little meta-research on the field itself. How large has this body of literature become? What topics does it cover? Which fields does it interact with? What challenges does it face? To answer these questions, here we present the first systematic bibliometric analysis of the GCR/ER literature. We consider all 3,437 documents in the OpenAlex database that mention either GCR or ER, and use bibliographic coupling (two documents are considered similar when they share many references) to identify ten distinct emergent research clusters in the GCR/ER literature. These clusters align in part with commonly identified drivers of GCR, such as advanced artificial intelligence (AI), climate change, and pandemics, or discuss the conceptual foundations of the GCR/ER field. However, the field is much broader than these topics, touching on disciplines as diverse as economics, climate modeling, agriculture, psychology, and philosophy. The metadata reveal that there are around 150 documents published on GCR/ER each year, the field has highly unequal gender representation, most research is done in the US and the UK, and many of the published articles come from a small subset of authors. We recommend creating new conferences and potentially new journals where GCR/ER focused research can aggregate, making gender and geographic diversity a higher priority, and fostering synergies across clusters to think about GCR/ER in a more holistic way. We also recommend building more connections to new fields and neighboring disciplines, such as systemic risk and policy, to encourage cross-fertilisation and the broader adoption of GCR/ER research."
2192	Evidential	"Spatio-temporal analysis of droughts is of paramount importance especially for future climate scenarios. We use complex network theoretic measures to understand spatio-temporal properties of precipitation driven meteorological drought across India in past and future climate scenarios. We construct drought networks using Event synchronization (ES) for moderate and extreme drought conditions derived using Standardized Precipitation Index at an aggregated scale of 6 months(SPI-6). Network measures like degree, closeness, betweenness and directionality are used to understand spatio-temporal properties of drought events. ES based networks can capture synchronous events and can help in ascertaining drought propagation through different regions. This study provides insight into the structural properties of drought networks and how they change for projected climate regimes. We find drought hotspots as well as regions which are vulnerable to spatially separated drought events. In the past, regions in western India were vulnerable to extreme droughts, which can propagate from other regions of the country. Use of complex networks also reveal a reversal in drought propagation directions in future climate scenarios. Furthermore, using centrality measures, we also identify regions which aid in drought propagation and act as pathways connecting drought hotspots. Thus, changes in structural and topological properties of complex networks can be used to understand the impact of climate change across regions."
8170	Hypothetical	"The past century of increases in human population and resource consumption has produced some undesirable effects, ranging from environmental degradation to climate change to political unrest. We are accustomed to seeing these dependent variables charted with time on the x-axis. But this study presents metrics of biodiversity, consumption, and pollution and their extremely strong correlations when charted against human population size. Then we suggest that a more rapid yet non-coercive lowering of global Total Fertility Rates to 1.75 by 2050, and holding there, will produce many benefits for current and future generations of our own species and for nature. Among these benefits are reduced CO2 emissions, habitat recovery, protection of wild species, and reduced conflict over scarce resources."
8367	Evidential	"Background: Government agencies at the state and federal levels have developed screening tools to classify disadvantaged communities, which are cumulatively burdened by social marginalization and environmental hazards. Status as a recognized disadvantaged community can determine access to public funding and protections associated with environmental justice policies. In California, multiple screening tools have been promulgated by state and federal agencies.  Objectives: To determine the extent to which screening tools differentially designated census block groups as disadvantaged. Also, to determine whether there were differences in the proportions of socially or racially marginalized individuals classified as living in disadvantaged communities between screening tools.  Methods: We quantitatively compared three screening tools used in California (CalEnviroScreen, Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool [CEJST], and Environmental Justice Index [EJI]) and two proposed tools (a modified version of CalEnviroScreen and a trivariate metric). We developed a statistical method to determine the extent to which each screening tool differentially prioritizes socioeconomically or racially marginalized groups for designation as living in disadvantaged communities.  Results: While many census block groups were consistently classified as disadvantaged communities by all screening tools, there was substantial variation among the tools. For example, CEJST classified twice as many California residents as living in disadvantaged communities compared to EJI, a difference of approximately 7.5 million people. We observed small but statistically significant differences in disadvantaged community designations for racial/ethnic composition, proportion of households in poverty, and population density.  Conclusion: The screening tools we assessed, which are used for regulatory decision- making, advocacy, and research, yielded significant discordant classifications of disadvantaged communities, with potential implications for which sociodemographic groups have access to resources and other interventions through state and federal policy."
8284	Evidential	"Forests are in decline worldwide due to human activities such as agricultural expansion, urbanization, and mineral extraction. Forest loss due to generally temporary causes, such as wildfire and forest management, is important to distinguish from permanent land use conversion due to the differing ecological and climate impacts of these disturbances and for the purposes of developing effective policies and management strategies. Existing global maps of the drivers of forest loss that are widely used are not spatially or thematically detailed enough for decision makers at local-to-regional scales, such as governments, land managers, or companies. Using publicly available satellite observations (Landsat, Sentinel) and ancillary biophysical and population data, we developed a 1 km resolution, global map of the dominant drivers of forest loss from 2001 to 2022 with seven classes: permanent agriculture (e.g., commodity crops or pasture), hard commodities (e.g., mining), shifting cultivation, forest management (e.g., logging or wood fiber plantations), settlements and infrastructure, wildfire, and other natural disturbances. We interpreted nearly 7,000 reference samples to train a global neural network model that classifies the driver of forest loss with an overall accuracy of 90.5%. Our results show that permanent agriculture was the leading driver of forest loss globally, representing 35% of loss from 2001 to 2022. The drivers of forest loss vary by region, with the leading driver identified as forest management in Europe, permanent agriculture across the tropics, and wildfire in Russia, the Asian mainland, North America, and Oceania. Our results enable assessment of forest disturbance dynamics from local to global scales and can support tracking progress towards corporate and governmental zero-deforestation commitments, monitoring deforestation risks within jurisdictions and supply chains, and assessment of global biodiversity targets."
2133	Exploratory	"The method of regional climate modelling was employed to assess the impacts of a warming climate on the 21st-century climate of Ireland. The regional climate model (RCM) simulations were run at high spatial resolution (3.8 and 4 km), the first systematic study of its kind at this scale, thus allowing a better evaluation of the local effects of climate change. To address the issue of uncertainty, a multi-model ensemble approach was employed. Through the ensemble approach, the uncertainty in the projections can be partly quantified, thus providing a measure of confidence in the projections. Simulations were run for the reference period 1981 2000 and the future period 2041 2060. Differences between the two periods provide a measure of climate change. The Consortium for Small-scale Modeling Climate Limited-area Modelling (COSMO-CLM) and Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) RCMs were used to downscale the following Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) global climate model (GCM) datasets: CNRM-CM5, EC-EARTH (four ensemble members), HadGEM2-ES, MIROC5 and MPI-ESM-LR. To account for the uncertainty in future greenhouse gas emissions, the future climate was simulated under both the Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP4.5) and RCP8.5 scenarios."
2779	Hypothetical	"Pockmarks are pervasive geomorphologic features identified along continental margins resulting from fluid expulsion on the seafloor.  However, the understanding of the underlying geological mechanism/control in relation to their evolution, distribution, and morphology is limited, especially along data-starved continental margins such as the Northern Orange Basin. Analysis of a high-quality 3D seismic reflection data reveals at least 50 individual pockmarks, two channel-like depressions and several irregular depressions in water depth ranging between 800 m and 2400 m. Morphologically, the pockmarks are circular, elongated, comet-like and crescentic in shape, with diameters and depths ranging between ‚àº0.2 - 2.8 km and ‚àº10 - 130 m, respectively. Preferential alignment of these pockmarks on the seafloor in relation to the axis of underlying turbidite channels, erosional morphologies and mass transport complexes portray a genetic relationship. The slope architecture hints at the possibility of both deep and shallow fluid source driving pockmark formation. Under this scenario, deep thermogenic gas derived from Cretaceous source rocks migrated along fault systems associated with the Late Cretaceous Megaslide complex to the overburden. The fluids are stored/redistributed in contourite and turbidite channels and subsequently focused toward the seafloor under an increased pore pressure regime. Yet, the fluids may be either solely biogenic gas or heterogeneous, incorporating biogenic components and pore-water derived from the channels and dewatering of the contourites. Importantly, the discovery of crescentic and elongated end-member pockmark morphologies indicate post-formation sculpting of the initial pockmark morphologies by bottom currents. The discovery of these deep-water pockmarks opens the possibility that such fluid escape features may be more widespread than currently documented in the Northern Orange Basin. This has implications in understanding of the petroleum system here and their potential role in the South Atlantic marine ecosystems and global climate change in terms of the expulsion of climate forcing gases."
2499	Exploratory	"Glaciers are among the least explored environments on Earth, especially from a perspective of nutrient stoichiometry. In this study, we documented and compared the nutrient availabilities (concentrations) and composition (stoichiometric ratios) of nutrients (C, N, and P) in six distinct habitats of a glacier terminus in the Yangtze River Source area, including surface ice (SI), basal ice (BI), basal sediment (BaS), newly exposed forefront soil close to glacial terminus (TS), soil at increasing distances from glacier terminus (DS), and forefront soil with well-developed vegetation (VS). The results showed that SI had significantly higher DOC and N concentrations as well as higher C:P and N:P ratios than BI. However, BI had significantly higher SRP than SI. In addition, both SI and BI had very high C:P and N:P ratios, suggesting P-limitation. For sediment/soil in glacier terminus, nitrogen and organic carbon concentrations were significantly lower in BaS, TS, and DS than in VS. Moreover, TP and SRP concentrations were significantly higher in BaS and VS than in TS and DS. These nutrient patterns could be explained by differences in biotic influence in soil development or by changes in soil physical properties. With regard to nutrient limitation, VS had a significantly higher C:N, C:P, and N:P ratios than BaS, TS, and DS, supporting a long-held biogeochemical and ecological paradigm that ecosystem processes during early successional stages are primarily organic C and N limited but are P-limited in later successional stages. Considering that glaciers cover around 10% of the terrestrial landmass and are experiencing severe retreat, documenting and comparing nutrient contents and stoichiometry in glacier terminus can further our understanding of global biogeochemical cycles under future climate change regimes."
3495	Exploratory	"The growth of vertically laminated calcium-sulphate wedges in the Atacama Desert is assumed to be driven by the interaction of moisture supply and salt dynamics in the subsurface. Geochronological data of these wedge laminations is yet sparse but indispensable to resolve wedge-growth phases and episodes of moisture supply and to use these deposits as a palaeoclimate archive in the hyperarid environment. Our pilot study presents a first approach of dating a calcium-sulphate wedge from the Atacama Desert using coarse-grain feldspar luminescence dating. Our results show a widespread and clustered equivalent-dose distribution of two wedge samples from ~20 Gy up to saturation. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) of quartz revealed unsuitable properties for dating wedge deposits. Consequently, we applied post-infrared infrared stimulated luminescence (post-IR IRSL) to coarse-grained feldspars. Since feldspar single-grain measurements yielded a low number of luminescent grains, we used 1 mm aliquots as reliable single-grain proxies for genuine single-grain measurements. Data from energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) showed that the feldspar single grains have large differences in their internal K content, resulting in an averaged internal K content of 3.9 ± 1.0 % for all luminescent grains. This result was subsequently used for dose rate and age calculations. Our results of equivalent-dose distributions and palaeodoses derived from the minimum age model reveal most recent wedge-growth activities at 10.6 ± 2.2 ka and 7.9 ± 1.8 ka for the two wedge samples."
6825	Exploratory	"Medications make up 12-25% of health care’s greenhouse gas emissions production. By utilizing a life cycle analysis approach, this article lays out each step of production and disposal and estimates the global journey of a generic clonazepam pill. Generic clonazepam was selected because it is a commonly prescribed medication and is often linked to deprescribing initiatives due to its potential patient harms. A visual map was created to illustrate each step of the medications life cycle, from Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) mining to patient usage. Our findings demonstrate that health care prescribing practices have tangible environmental impacts and manufacturers should continue to invest in operational streamlining to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Overall, there is a need for clinicians and leadership to become more aware of the connection between medication prescription and climate change so that healthcare systems can start to reduce its emission production."
2138	Exploratory	"Hydro-morphological processes (HMP; any process in the spectrum between debris flows and flash floods) threaten human infrastructures and lives; and their effects are only expected to worsen in the context of climate change. One of the ways to limit the potential damage of HMP is to take preventive or remedial actions probabilistically knowing where and how frequently they may occur. The expected information on where and how frequently a given earth surface process may manifest itself is referred to as susceptibility. And, for the whole Chinese territory, a susceptibility model for HMP is currently not available.     To address this issue, we propose a yearly space-time model consisting of a Generalized Linear Model of the binomial family. The target variable of such model is the annual presence/absence information of HMP per catchment across China, from 1985 to 2015. This information has been accessed via the Chinese catalogue of HMP, a data repository the Chinese government has activated in 195X and which is still currently in use. This binary spatio-temporal information is regressed against a set of time-invariant (catchment shape indices and terrain attributes) and time-variant (urban coverage, rainfall, vegetation density and land use) covariates. Furthermore, we include a regression constant for each of the 31 years under consideration and also a three-years aggregated information on previously occurred (and not-occurred) HMP.        We consider two versions of our modeling approach, an explanatory benchmark where we fit the whole space-time HMP data, including a multiple intercept per year. Furthermore, we also extend this explanatory model into a predictive one, by considering four temporal cross-validation schemes (Forward-All, Forward-Sequence, Backward-All, and Backward-Sequence), removing the yearly multiple intercept. In the first of 31 temporal replicates, Forward-All is calibrated for 1985 and then used to predict from 1986 to 2015. In the second step, a model is calibrated for 1985 and 1986 combined and used to validate the rest of the space-time series. This is replicated up to the last model where the combined data from 1985 to 2014 is calibrated to predict the last year of the HMP presence/absence data. Forward-Sequence also moves in the same temporal direction but the sampling scheme sequentially extracts two years at a time, one for calibration and one for validation. For instance, the first step is trained for 1985 and used to predict 1986; then the second step is trained for 1986 and used to predict 1987. As for Backward-All, and Backward-Sequence, their structure is the same but the temporal direction goes from 2015 to 1985.           Our explanatory model suggests that the overall number of HMP events per year has increased in the last decade and that the annual susceptibility has subsequently followed the same trend.  As for the four cross-validation routines, Forward-Sequence shows excellent performance with an average AUC of 0.83, slightly better than Forward-All, Backward-All, and Backward-Sequence. From an interpretative standpoint, this implies that the best spatio-temporal prediction we obtained is associated with short-term variations of the HMP distribution and that such variations should be considered in a forward temporal direction.    Furthermore, we portrayed the annual susceptibility models into 30 maps, where the south-east of China is shown to exhibit the largest variation in the spatio-temporal probability of HMP occurrence. Also, we compressed the whole spatio-temporal prediction into three summary maps. These report the mean, maximum and 95\% confidence interval of the spatio-temporal susceptibility distribution per catchment, per year.   The information we present has a dual value. On the one hand, we provide a platform to interpret environmental effects on HMP at a very large scale, both spatially (the whole Chinese country) and temporally (31 years of records). On the other hand, we provide information on which catchments are more prone to experience a HMP-driven disaster. Hence, a step further would be to select the more susceptible catchment for detailed analysis where physically-based models could be tested to estimate the potentially impacted areas."
1363	Exploratory	"The development of large ice-sheets across the Northern Hemisphere during the late Pliocene and the emergence of the glacial-interglacial cycles that punctuate the Quaternary mark a significant threshold in Earths climate history. Although a number of different mechanisms have been proposed to initiate this cooling and the onset of major Northern Hemisphere glaciation, reductions in atmospheric concentrations of CO2 likely played a key role. The emergence of a stratified (halocline) water column in the subarctic north-west Pacific Ocean at 2.73 Ma has often been interpreted as an event which would have limited oceanic ventilation of CO2 to the atmosphere, thereby helping to cool the global climate system. Here, diatom carbon isotopes (Œ¥13Cdiatom) are used to reconstruct changes in regional carbon dynamics through this interval. Results show that the development of a salinity stratification did not fundamental alter the net oceanic/atmospheric flux of CO2 in the subarctic north-west Pacific Ocean through the late Pliocene/early Quaternary. These results provide further insights into the long-term controls on global carbon cycling and the role of the subarctic Pacific Ocean in instigating global climatic changes."
5508	Exploratory	"Researchers and engineers have increasingly used Deep Learning (DL) for a variety of Remote Sensing (RS) tasks. However, data from local observations or via ground truth is often quite limited for training DL models, especially when these models represent key socio-environmental problems, such as the monitoring of extreme, destructive climate events, biodiversity, and sudden changes in ecosystem states. Such cases, also known as small data problems, pose significant methodological challenges. This review summarises these challenges in the RS domain and the possibility of using emerging DL techniques to overcome them. We show that the small data problem is a common challenge across disciplines and scales that results in poor model generalisability and transferability. We then introduce an overview of ten promising DL techniques: transfer learning, self-supervised learning, semi-supervised learning, few-shot learning, zero-shot learning, active learning, weakly supervised learning, multitask learning, process-aware learning, and ensemble learning; we also include a validation technique known as spatial k-fold cross validation. Our particular contribution was to develop a flowchart that helps DL users select which technique to use given by answering a few questions. We hope that our review article facilitate DL applications to tackle societally important environmental problems with limited reference data."
7744	Exploratory	"How temperature biases in both climate models and observations are adjusted in order to make comparisons of climate change signals has been seldom discussed, yet the choice of adjustment method has a large impact on the resulting conclusions. When the primary interest is how global warming evolves through time, how the models’ diagnosed equilibrium climate sensitivities (ECS) correlate with yearly temperatures is a logical test of agreement. Unlike other commonly used methods, it is shown that correlations are maximized when all of the time series are adjusted so their trend lines intersect at year zero. The issue is important to the interpretation of how climate models reveal the global warming signal over time, to how well models agree with observations, and to the policy impact and public debates regarding climate change."
7732	Evidential	"Polycrisis has emerged as a new property of the Anthropocene, driven by the co-interaction of multiple shocks and stressors. Although sector-specific studies offer insights into the changing frequency and intensity of these disruptions, a holistic, cross-sectoral analysis remains absent, limiting a more integrated understanding of the phenomenon. To fill this gap, we have compiled a database that contains the number of shocks (climatic, geophysical, ecological, economic, technological, conflict) covering 175 countries from 1970 to 2019. We provide evidence that, even if China, India, Indonesia, Philippines and the U.S. have experienced more shocks relative to other countries, shocks have not evolved uniformly over time on a global or regional scale. Our results show that shocks became progressively interconnected between 1970 and 2000, particularly around the Conflict-Technology-Climate nexus, before showing a regionally-dependent shift in behavior. This change underlines the importance of cross-sectoral and cross-national tools for disaster and crisis management, particularly for interacting risks in a context of realignment of the world order. In this respect, we urge that the emerging polycrisis research community must recognize these global and regional patterns."
7715	Evidential	"Nares Strait is a major pathway from the Arctic Ocean and an important climate system component. Sea ice's granular nature is pertinent in such straits with small islands where floes propagate by fracturing upon collisions. Since climate models are relatively coarse and use continuous sea ice rheology, they only partially capture the complexities of floe interactions. We use a floe-scale model, SubZero, to explore the role of islands in sea ice transport through Nares Strait. We demonstrate that SubZero can reproduce the crucial observed sea ice characteristics, including the area transport and variance in area fluxes. We found that a size-dependent critical stress criterion was necessary to simulate the power-law exponent in this domain's floe size distribution. Conducting simulations with and without the islands, we demonstrate the effectiveness of floe-scale models in simulating sea ice dynamics in straits and emphasize small islands' crucial role in affecting overall transport."
7649	Hypothetical	"True polar wander (TPW), the rotation of the solid Earth relative to the spin axis, is driven by changes in the Earth's moment of inertia induced by mantle convection and may have influenced past climate and life. Long-term TPW is typically inferred from large polar shifts in paleomagnetic apparent polar wander paths or computed directly by rotating them in a mantle reference frame. However, most apparent polar wander paths do not incorporate uncertainties in paleomagnetic data, which may bias estimates of TPW. Here, we provide new quantitative estimates of TPW since 320 Ma by placing a recent global apparent polar wander path corrected for age bias and with improved uncertainty quantification in existing mantle reference frames. We find large amplitude (>10°) but slow TPW rotations that predominantly occurred about two equatorial axes that are approximately orthogonal. During the Triassic and Jurassic, a ~24° TPW oscillation occurred about an axis at ~15°W, close to the present-day TPW axis at ~10°E. In contrast, the TPW axis was located at ~85°E during a smaller oscillation (~6–10°) over the past ~80 Ma, as well as between 260 and 320 Ma. We propose that these varying TPW axes reflect changes in the distribution and flux of subduction in the Tethyan and Pacific realms. We find no evidence for previously postulated fast (>1°/Ma) TPW oscillations in the Cretaceous and Jurassic. Finally, we propose that calibrating mantle convection models against reconstructed TPW will improve our understanding of mantle dynamics and the drivers of TPW itself."
5731	Evidential	"Escalating climate impacts predicted in the past decades are now a reality almost everywhere on the planet, and the time-critical dimension of the climate crisis means that the coming years will be instrumental in securing a climate resilient future for generations to come. Education is central to promoting climate action, yet the role that climate change education plays in advancing climate awareness, action and advocacy, and helping to enhance resiliency for young generations and the public at large is poorly understood. Here, we provide a first-of-its kind mapping of the literature on climate change education to better understand topic relationships and spatial distribution, and highlight potential new avenues for research on climate education. Machine learning methods including semantic analysis, geoparsing and topic modeling are used to support our study. Topic modeling shows that climate change education is a very interdisciplinary field of research well embedded in key climate change research topics including climate change adaptation, disaster risks and education, mitigation and sustainability, with the bulk of the literature situated in social science research, followed by topics on agricultural and adaptation, and education topics including methodologies, paradigm shifts, and research methods. Central to climate change education is the methodological dimension of teaching and educating either through formal or informal methods. Topic clustering reveals that topics including energy, renewable energy, fossil fuel and emissions are visibly far from topics school, teacher and science. As expected, social research lies in the middle and overlaps at the periphery with most other topic clusters, except with topics of energy mitigation, disaster risk, and medical health. Through geoparsing, country mentions and case studies are largely skewed towards the English speaking countries and in particular the United States‚Äì though this is not always the case when we look at more specific topics. This study should stimulate more targeted research into the specific topics that have emerged. Our findings also call for a strong incentive for governments to react on funding for further research into climate change education, also stimulating a global exchange of ideas through support and incentives for open science. More broadly, climate change education should be compulsory at all levels of formal education, ensuring a comprehensive curriculum of all relevant topics."
3065	Hypothetical	"Recently, severe warm-water episodes have occurred frequently against a background trend of global ocean warming. Sea Surface Temperature anomalies have an impact on the integrity of marine ecosystems which is an important part of the Earth’s climate system. The drastic effects of Marine Heatwaves on aquatic life have been on a steady incline in the recent years, damaging aquatic ecosystems resulting in enormous loss of marine life. The study of Marine Heatwaves has arisen as a fast-rising topic of inquiry. Operational forecasting and early warning systems that can predict such events can help in proactive planning and better mitigation strategies. In this study, the potential of machine learning models, namely Random Forest and N-BEATS, was evaluated to predict sea surface temperature on a seasonal scale using the NOAA OISST v2.1 dataset. The predicted sea surface temperature data was then used to forecast the occurrence of Marine Heatwaves up to a year in advance. The proposed models were tested across four historical Marine Heatwave events around the world. The results showed that the models were able to capture the onset, trend, and extent of the extreme events accurately."
1184	Exploratory	"Mesopotamia, known as the cradle of civilisation, gave rise to the first state-based urban societies with sophistic political hierarchies. Its rich history full of important cultural achievements was accompanied by fundamental environmental changes over the Holocene. While geo-bio-archives from the broader region reflect slightly varying climate histories, there is a clear consensus on a more humid climate regime during the Early Holocene, triggering early rain-fed agricultural practices in Northern Mesopotamia representing the foundation of initial urbanisation. In the southern basin, declining rainfall and higher competition for natural resources at a somewhat later stage in combination with the development of irrigation techniques and the transgression of the Arabian Gulf seem to have contributed to the formation of complex state-based urban societies at sites such as Eridu, Ur, and Uruk, where landscape dynamics are well-preserved in the stratigraphic record. Against the background of long-term climate trends, it seems that also Rapid Climate Change events‚Äîshort-term climatic anomalies such as identified around 8,200, 5,200, or 4,200 BP‚Äîhave taken their toll on Mesopotamian people.  Many links between changes in climate and landscape, and socio-technical adaptation based on interdisciplinary research seem straightforward, especially where confirmation exists by cuneiform texts or archaeological evidence. The gap in chronological resolution between rather precise information on historical state development on the one hand, and on climatic changes with a much higher uncertainty on the other hand, may generate an elusive fit between records and requires caution in any attempt of environmental determinism when trying to explain cultural history."
3188	Evidential	"Biomass carbon stocks (BCS) play a vital role in the climate system, but benchmarked estimates prior to the late 20th century remain scarce. Here, by making use of an early global forest resource assessment and harmonizing information on land use and carbon densities, we establish a global BCS account for the year 1950. Our best-guess BCS estimate is 450.7 PgC (median of all modulations: 518.3 PgC, range: 443.9-584.6 PgC), with ecosystems in Southern America and Western Africa storing c. 27 and 16% of the total respectively. Our estimates are in line with land change emissions estimates and suggest a reduction in BCS of 8-29% compared to the median, with losses in tropical subcontinents partially offset by gains in northern subcontinents. Our study demonstrates an approach to reconstruct global BCS over the 20th century to complement carbon flux-based modelling efforts and identify emerging global land transitions."
2748	Hypothetical	"Cloud and convective parameterizations strongly influence uncertainties in equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS). We provide a proof-of-concept study to constrain these parameterizations in a perturbed parameter ensemble of the atmosphere-only version of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) Model E2.1 simulations by evaluating model biases in the present-day runs using multiple satellite climatologies and by comparing simulated Œ¥18O of precipitation (Œ¥18Op), known to be sensitive to parameterization schemes, with a global database of speleothem Œ¥18O records covering the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), mid-Holocene (MH) and pre-industrial (PI) periods. Relative to modern interannual variability, paleoclimate simulations show greater sensitivity to parameter changes, allowing for an evaluation of model uncertainties over a broader range of climate forcing and the identification of parts of the world that are parameter sensitive. Certain simulations reproduced absolute Œ¥18Op values across all time periods, along with LGM and MH Œ¥18Op anomalies relative to the PI, better than the default parameterization. No single set of parameterizations worked well in all climate states, likely due to the non-stationarity of cloud feedbacks under varying boundary conditions. Future work that involves varying multiple parameter sets simultaneously with coupled ocean feedbacks will likely provide improved constraints on cloud and convective parameterizations."
2626	Hypothetical	"The response of terrestrial ecosystems to climate perturbations typically persist longer than the timescale of the forcing, a phenomenon that is broadly referred to as ecosystem legacy. Understanding the strength of legacy is critical for predicting ecosystem sensitivity to climate extremes and the extent to which persistent changes in land surface-atmosphere exchange might feedback onto the climate, for example, extending drought. The cause of ecosystem legacy has been tied to numerous factors such as changes in leaf area index, however, few studies have tested how changes in root profiles in response to stress might alter an ecosystem's recovery time. We utilize an Earth System Model that includes a dynamic root module where vegetation can forage for water and nutrients by altering their root profiles. As expected, the simulations show that in response to water stress events most ecosystems deepen their root profiles. In semi-arid ecosystems, this response expedites recovery (i.e. less legacy) relative to simulations without dynamics roots because access to deeper water pools after the initial event remains favorable. In wetter ecosystems, the development of deeper root profiles slows down the recovery timescale (i.e. more legacy) because the deeper root profile reduces access to nutrients. The recovery of hyperarid systems is also delayed presumably to the loss of shallow roots and ability to access water from smaller rain events. The results show that the response of root profiles to external forcing is a critical component of global patterns of legacy that is not typically represented in Earth System Models."
7060	Hypothetical	"Global Carbon Project (GCP) data shows that natural processes have been sequestering atmospheric CO2 on a yearly basis in proportion to how much the atmospheric CO2 concentration has risen above pre-Industrial levels, the so-called CO2 “sink rate”. Here it is argued that the future trajectory of the sink rate has not been adequately addressed, which has led to overestimation of future atmospheric CO2 concentrations, and thus of global warming. Additionally, use of the CO2 “airborne fraction” concept has led to some misunderstanding regarding how natural processes remove CO2 from the atmosphere, including unrealistic projections of future sink rates. The 20 land models and 10 ocean models used to estimate rates of CO2 removal from the atmosphere produce a wide variety of results. The GCP averages all of these model results together to obtain a best estimate of the yearly CO2 fluxes. Based upon this average, assuming a linearly declining sink rate into the future derived from GCP data, emissions reductions of only 1% per year totaling 39% below 2023 emissions are required over the next 50 years to stabilize atmospheric CO2 near 457 ppm. Assuming the IPCC best estimate of climate sensitivity of 3 deg. C to a hypothetical doubling of atmospheric CO2, this would meet the 2015 Paris Agreement target of less than 2 deg. C of eventual global-average surface warming.  But if observation-based estimates of climate sensitivity around 2 deg. C are assumed, then the 1.5 deg. C Paris goal is easily met. These results, though, are very dependent upon the assumed linear decrease of the future sink rates."
1284	Evidential	"Phenology is an important indicator of climate change impacts on vegetated ecosystems. Changes in leaf unfolding dates in response to changing temperatures have been well documented from in-situ phenological measurements across Central Europe. However, it is unclear whether those processes can be scaled to the landscape scale, which is important to accurately represent phenology in (global) vegetation models. Moderate resolution remote sensing time series, which measure land surface phenology instead of species specific phenophases, can help answering this question. We here test for the effect of pre-season temperature and winter-chilling on the inter-annual variation in start of season derived from Landsat time series for a forest landscape in southern Germany. The landscape is comprised of broadleaved and coniferous forests and thus typical for montane forest landscapes in Central Europe. We find strong evidence for average pre-season mean daily temperature driving inter-annual variation in start of season, with a -3.74 d ¬∞C-1 earlier start of season for broadleaved forests and a -2.68 d ¬∞C-1 earlier start of season for coniferous forests over the time period 1985 to 2015. This relationship, however, was modulated by the number of chilling days during winter, with a decreasing effect of pre-season temperature with decreasing number of chilling days. The inter-annual variation in start of season predicted from our model ‚Äì i.e., calibrated solely from Landsat satellite time series ‚Äì showed good agreement with in-situ observations of bud-break (Pearson‚Äôs r = 0.79/RMSE = 4.88 d for broadleaved forests and r = 0.62/RMSE = 6.57 d for coniferous forests). We conclude that in-situ based processes are also detectable at the landscape-scale and that considering winter-chilling is important for accurately predicting phenology, which should be recognized in (global) vegetation models."
2801	Exploratory	"Understanding the spatial variation of soil properties is central to many sub-disciplines of soil science. Commonly in soil mapping studies, a soil map is constructed through prediction by a statistical or non-statistical model calibrated with measured values of the soil property and environmental covariates of which maps are available. In recent years, the field has gradually shifted attention towards more complex statistical and algorithmic tools from the field of machine learning. These models are particularly useful for their predictive capabilities and are often more accurate than classical models, but they lack interpretability and their functioning cannot be readily visualized. There is a need to understand how these these models can be used for purposes other than making accurate prediction and whether it is possible to extract information on the relationships among variables found by the models. In this paper we describe and evaluate a set of methods for the interpretation of complex models of soil variation. An overview is presented of how model-independent methods can serve the purpose of interpreting and visualizing different aspects of the model. We illustrate the methods with the interpretation of two mapping models in a case study mapping topsoil organic carbon in France. We reveal the importance of each driver of soil variation, their interaction, as well as the functional form of the association between environmental covariate and the soil property. Interpretation is also conducted locally for an area and two spatial locations with distinct land use and climate. We show that in all cases important insights can be obtained, both into the overall model functioning and into the decision made by the model for a prediction at a location. This underpins the importance of going beyond accurate prediction in soil mapping studies. Interpretation of mapping models reveal how the predictions are made and can help us formulating hypotheses on the underlying soil processes and mechanisms driving soil variation."
8086	Evidential	"The concept of climate change vulnerability (CCV) has become an angular one for understanding the differential impacts of climate change (CC). It has evolved from multiple disciplines, leading to a diversity of conceptual frameworks. Particularly, in Mexico – where CCV research and practice have increased – such diversity has resulted in a lack of clarity on how to operationalize it, and limited replicability. In this context, this research aims to identify how CCV is conceptualized in Mexican policies and by practitioners, and to analyze if the socioecosystem perspective contributes to its integral comprehension and facilitates its operationalization. To do so, we developed: a) a content analysis of 27 CC Mexican policies; and b) interviews applied to 15 practitioners. Results show that two main conceptualizations of CCV are dominant: outcome vulnerability and contextual vulnerability, each being represented by an Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) framework, the Fourth and the Fifth Assessment Reports (AR4 and AR5 respectively). Policies and interviewees present inconsistencies in the stated conceptual framework, definition, and components of CCV, which shows a limited understanding of the concept. Regarding the socioecosystem perspective, 44% of the policies adopt it, while only one practitioner incorporates the perspective into practice. We conclude that CCV global frameworks are not properly adopted in Mexico due to limited guidance for applying the theory into practice. Also, the existing frameworks do not reflect the complexity of CCV, and therefore, the use of socioecosystem approaches may lead to a better understanding."
5350	Exploratory	"To meet electricity demand using renewable energy supply, wind farm locations should be chosen to minimise variability in output, especially at night when solar photovoltaics cannot be relied upon. Wind farm location must balance grid-proximity, resource potential, and wind correlation between farms. A top-down planning approach for farm locations can mitigate demand unmet by wind supply, yet the present Australian wind energy market has bottom-up short-term planning. Here we show a computationally tractable method for optimising farm locations to maximise total supply. We find that Australia‚Äôs currently operational and planned wind farms produce less power with more variability than a hypothetical optimal set of farms with equivalent capacity within 100 km of the AEMO grid. Regardless of the superior output, this hypothetical set is still subject to variability due to large-scale weather correlated with climate modes (i.e., El Ni√±o). We study multiple scenarios and highlight several internationally transferable planning implications."
6049	Exploratory	"There is long-standing interest in the interactions between atmospheric and hydrological processes and solid Earth deformation, including the occurrence of earthquakes. Here, we review evidence for the effects of climatic processes and weather on deformation and seismicity in the lithosphere over a wide range of time scales, ranging from load cycles associated with the ice ages to the effects of short-term weather events. Space- and ground-based geophysical observations allow us to capture the redistribution of surface loads in the form of water, ice, and sediments, as well as near-surface pressure and temperature changes in the atmosphere and varying fluid pressure in the shallow subsurface. While earthquakes are generally the result of tectonic or volcanic activity, the climatic forcings induce stress changes on faults that in some cases can be shown to significantly encourage or retard the occurrence of earthquakes, depending on the degree to which the external forces align with the background tectonic stress field. Stress changes associated with the emplacement and removal of km-thick ice sheets and lakes are large enough to substantially change slip- and earthquake rates on major plate-boundary faults and can also trigger events in largely aseismic continental interiors. However, climate-earthquake interactions are subtle and proving the interaction between climate and earthquakes requires careful mechanical modeling and statistical analysis. While investigations of earthquake weather and climate are not likely to be relevant for the characterization and mitigation of earthquake hazard, they provide important insights into the physical processes associated with lithospheric deformation, the earthquake cycle and frictional faulting in the Earth."
1494	Evidential	"High elevation or high latitude hydropower production (HP) strongly relies on water resources that are influenced by glacier melt and are thus highly sensitive to climate warming. Despite of the wide-spread glacier retreat since the development of HP infrastructure in the 20th century, little quantitative information is available about the role of glacier mass loss for HP. We provide the first regional quantification for the share of Alpine hydropower production that directly relies on the waters released by glacier mass loss, i.e. on depletion of long-term ice storage that cannot be replenished by precipitation in the coming decades. Based on the case of Switzerland (which produces over 50% of its electricity from hydropower), we show that since 1980, 3.0% to 4.0% (1.0 to 1.4 TWh yr-1) of the country-scale hydropower production was directly provided by the net glacier mass loss and that this share is likely to reduce substantially by 2040-2060. For the period 2070-2090, a production reduction of about 1.0 TWh yr-1 is anticipated. The highlighted regional differences, both in terms of HP share from glacier mass loss and in terms of timing of production decline, emphasize the need for similar analyses in other Alpine or high latitude regions."
3632	Exploratory	"The beginning of the Mid-Pleistocene Transition (MPT) ~920 ka BP marked the expansion of northern hemisphere ice shields and caused a significant climate change in NW Europe. The MPT ended with the establishment of the 100 kyr ice age cyclicity at ~640 ka BP, due to orbital eccentricity changes. Previous studies explained the northern hemisphere cooling by cooling of sea-surface temperatures, increased sea-ice cover and/or changes in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) strength. We here discuss very-high resolution parametric echosounder (Parasound) imagery and sediment core analytics from a plastered drift at the eastern Campeche Bank (southern Gulf of Mexico), which was deposited under the influence of the Loop Current (LC). The LC transports warm tropical waters from the Caribbean into the Gulf via the Yucatan Channel. It is a key component of the Gulf Stream system, driving the ocean heat, salinity, and moisture transport towards the N Atlantic. The joint interpretation of reflection patterns, age constraints from color-scanning, foraminiferal stable oxygen isotopes, Sr isotope ratios (87Sr/86Sr) and core-seismic integration led to consistent conclusions about changes in LC strength across the MPT, thereby modulating the deep base level and the deposition of the plastered drift. The development of offlapping or onlapping plastered drifts, or the transition between the two termination patterns is best explained by changes in the depth of the relative deep base level and interpreted by changes in the flow regime. Initially, the Middle Miocene to Pliocene closure of the Central American Seaway caused the onset and intensification of the LC and hence a deep base level fall. The sedimentary deposits from this phase have an offlapping prograding clinoform configuration, resembling a forced regression systems tract as is known from shelf areas. The deep base level fall caused sediment truncation above 500 m present day water depth. Below 500-550 m, the offlapping succession is overlain by sigmoidal and onlapping, transgressive systems tract like clinoforms. The transition from deep base level fall prior to the MPT to deep base level rise documents the weakening of the LC during the early MPT. After the MPT, the LC continued to weaken. The related reduction of heat transport from the Western Atlantic Warm Water Pool into the North Atlantic contributes to the further cooling of the northern hemisphere. Generally, the development of offlapping or onlapping plastered drifts or the transition between the two termination patterns can be explained by changes in the depth of the relative deep base level and interpreted by changes in the flow regime."
2797	Definitive	"The agriculture sector can contribute to climate change mitigation by reducing its own greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, sequestering carbon in vegetation and soils, and providing biomass to substitute for fossil fuels and other GHG intensive products. The sector also needs to address water, soil, and biodiversity impacts caused by historic and current practices. Emerging EU policies create incentives for cultivation of perennial plants that provide biomass along with environmental benefits. One such option, common in northern Europe, is to include grass in rotations with annual crops to provide biomass while remediating soil organic carbon (SOC) losses and other environmental impacts. Here, we apply a spatially explicit model on >81,000 sub-watersheds in EU27+UK (Europe) to explore the effects of widespread deployment of such systems. Based on current accumulated SOC losses in individual sub-watersheds, the model identifies and quantifies suitable areas for increased grass cultivation and corresponding biomass- and protein supply, SOC sequestration, and reductions in nitrogen emissions to water as well as wind and water erosion. The model also provides information about possible flood mitigation. The results indicate a significant climate mitigation potential, with combined annual GHG savings from soil-carbon sequestration and displacement of natural gas with biogas from grass-based biorefineries, equivalent to 13-48% of current GHG emissions from agriculture in Europe. The environmental co-benefits are also notable, in some cases exceeding the estimated mitigation needs. Yield increases for annual crops in modified rotations mitigate the displacement effect of increasing grass cultivation. If the grass is used as feedstock in lieu of annual crops, the displacement effect can be negative, i.e., a reduced need for annual crop production elsewhere. Incentivizing widespread deployment will require supportive policy measures as well as new uses of grass biomass, e.g., as feedstock for green biorefineries producing protein concentrate, biofuels and other biobased products."
8812	Exploratory	"Compound climate hazards—where extreme events co-occur— pose increasing risks to our socio-ecological systems, yet their spatial dynamics remain poorly understood. We introduce a novel metric to quantify simultaneous drought and heatwave exposure, applying it to Niger’s Dosso region over a 24-year period (2000–2023) using remote sensing and GIS-based techniques. Our analysis reveals distinct spatiotemporal patterns: Southern and northern municipalities emerge as heatwave hotspots, while drought frequency shifts from southern dominance during peak rainy seasons to central and northern prevalence throughout the rainy season, with most droughts classified as mild. The metric identifies critical years of profound compound hazard occurrence—2000, 2002, 2009, 2011, 2015, and 2021— in northern and central-eastern municipalities. By integrating multi-hazard dynamics, this innovative approach enhances understanding of localised compound climate hazard exposure and lays the groundwork to inform targeted adaptation strategies in climate-vulnerable regions."
3123	Evidential	"Modelling the risk of natural hazards for society, ecosystems, and the economy is subject to strong uncertainties, even more so in the context of a changing climate, evolving societies, growing economies, and declining ecosystems.  Here we present a new feature of the climate risk modelling platform CLIMADA which allows to carry out global uncertainty and sensitivity analysis. CLIMADA underpins the Economics of Climate Adaptation (ECA) methodology which provides decision makers with a fact-base to understand the impact of weather and climate on their economies, communities, and ecosystems, including appraisal of bespoke adaptation options today and in future. We apply the new feature to an ECA analysis of risk from tropical cyclone storm surge to people in Vietnam to showcase the comprehensive treatment of uncertainty and sensitivity of the model outputs, such as the spatial distribution of risk exceedance probabilities or the benefits of different adaptation options. We argue that broader application of uncertainty and sensitivity analyses will enhance transparency and inter-comparison of studies among climate risk modellers and help focus future research. For decision-makers and other users of climate risk modelling, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis has the potential to lead to better-informed decisions on climate adaptation. Beyond provision of uncertainty quantification, the presented approach does contextualise risk assessment and options appraisal, and might be used to inform the development of story-lines and climate adaptation narratives."
5481	Evidential	"Flooding is the leading natural hazard in Iowa and has resulted in billions of dollars of damage to properties and critical infrastructure over the past couple of decades. Land alterations, urbanization, and changing precipitation regimes increase the magnitude and frequency of flood events. Considering the increasing risk, flood mitigation efforts are significant to reduce future losses. In this study, we present a comprehensive flood mitigation assessment for the cities of Cedar Falls, Cedar Rapids, and Waterloo in Iowa, utilizing various datasets such as property information, flood inundation maps, mitigation costs, and depth-damage functions. The research revealed that flooding has a minimal impact on Waterloo below the 200-year return period flood scenario, but Cedar Falls and Cedar Rapids are significantly vulnerable, requiring more mitigation investments and planning. The study conducted a benefit-cost analysis, indicating that dry floodproofing is the most feasible option to reduce flood impacts in all studied communities. Moreover, the research conducted a climate data-driven analysis, which found that elevating structures significantly increases the number of feasible mitigation options, regardless of various long-term climate projections. The study also analyzed predetermined mitigation budgets, revealing potential avoided losses and benefit-cost ratios for properties with the highest BCRs and prioritizing them to maximize the total benefit to the communities. The findings provide valuable insights for community decision-makers to prioritize flood mitigation measures based on the benefit-cost ratio. Overall, the study provides valuable insights and recommendations for decision-makers, contributing to the development of effective flood mitigation strategies to minimize the potential impact of flooding in the studied regions."
3099	Hypothetical	"Net-zero greenhouse gas emissions targets are driving interest in opportunities for biomass-based negative emissions and bioenergy, including from marine sources such as seaweed. Yet the biophysical and economic limits to farming seaweed at scales relevant to the global carbon budget have not been assessed in detail. We use coupled seaweed growth and technoeconomic models to estimate the costs of global seaweed production and related climate benefits, systematically testing the relative importance of model parameters. Under our most optimistic assumptions, sinking farmed seaweed to the deep sea to sequester a gigaton of CO2 per year costs as little as $560/tCO2 on average, while using farmed seaweed for products that avoid a gigaton of CO2-equivalent greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions annually could return a profit of $30/tCO2-eq. However, these costs depend on low farming costs, high seaweed yields, and assumptions that almost all carbon in seaweed is removed from the atmosphere and seaweed products can displace products with substantial embodied non-CO2 GHG emissions. Moreover, the gigaton-scale climate benefits we model would require farming vary large areas (>100,000 km2)—a >40-fold increase in the area currently farmed. Our results therefore suggest that seaweed-based climate benefits may be feasible, but targeted research and demonstrations are needed to further reduce economic and biophysical uncertainties."
2116	Evidential	"Highly simplified approaches continue to underpin hydrological climate change impact assessments across the Earth‚Äôs mountainous regions. Fully-integrated surface-subsurface models may hold far greater potential to represent the distinctive regimes of steep, geologically-complex headwater catchments. However, their utility has not yet been tested across a wide range of mountainous settings. Here, an integrated model of two adjacent calcareous Alpine headwaters that accounts for 2D surface flow, 3D variably-saturated groundwater flow, and evapotranspiration is presented. An energy balance-based representation of snow dynamics contributed to the model‚Äôs high-resolution forcing data, and a sophisticated 3D geological model helped to define and parameterize the subsurface structure. In the first known attempt to calibrate a catchment-scale integrated model of a mountainous region automatically, numerous uncertain model parameters were estimated. The salient features of the hydrological regime could ultimately be satisfactorily reproduced ‚Äì over an 11-month evaluation period, the Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency of simulated streamflow at the main gauging station was 0.76. Spatio-temporal visualization of the forcing data and simulated responses further confirmed the model‚Äôs broad coherence. Presumably due to unresolved local subsurface heterogeneity, closely replicating the somewhat contrasting groundwater level signals observed near to one another proved more elusive. Finally, we assessed the impacts of various common model simplifications and assumptions on key simulated outputs, finding strongly affected model performance in many cases. Although certain outstanding challenges must be overcome if the global uptake of integrated models in mountain regions is to increase, our work demonstrates the feasibility and benefits of their application in such complex systems."
2694	Evidential	"The Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) manages the electric power across most of Texas. They make short-term assessments of electricity demand based on historical weather over the last decade or two, thereby ignoring the effects of climate change and the possibility of weather variability outside of the recent historical range. In this paper, we develop an empirical methodology to predict the impact of weather on energy demand. We use that with a large ensemble of climate model runs to construct a probability distribution of power demand on the ERCOT grid for summer and winter 2021. We find that the ERCOT grid is running with no safety margin, particularly during summer. We estimate a 5% chance that maximum power demand would be within 4.3 and 7.9 GW of ERCOT’s estimate of best-case available resources during summer and winter 2021, respectively, and a 20% chance it would be within 7.1 and 17 GW. With such small margins, the unexpected reductions in available power can lead to shortages on the grid. This problem is partially hidden by the fact that ERCOTs seasonal assessments, based entirely on historical weather, are too low. Prior to the 2021 winter blackout, ERCOT forecasted an extreme peak load of 67 GW. In reality, we estimate hourly peak demand was 82 GW, 22% above ERCOT’s most extreme forecast and about equal to the best-case available power. Given the high stakes, ERCOT should develop probabilistic estimates using modern scientific tools to predict the range of power demand more accurately."
5000	Evidential	"Mortality due to extreme temperatures is one of the most important impacts of climate change. In this analysis, we use historic mortality and temperature data from 106 cities in the United States to develop a model that predicts deaths attributable to temperature. With this model and projections of future temperature from climate models, we estimate temperature-related deaths in the United States due to climate change, changing demographics, and adaptation. We find that temperature-related deaths increase rapidly as the climate warms, but this is mainly due to an expanding and aging population. For global average warming below 3°C above pre-industrial levels, we find that climate change slightly reduces temperature-related mortality in the U.S. because the reduction of cold-related mortality exceeds the increase in heat-related deaths. Above 3°C warming, whether the increase in heat-related deaths exceeds the decrease in cold-related deaths depends on the level of adaptation, emphasizing the need for our society to effectively adapt to climate change that we do not avoid. Most of the reduction in mortality is occurring in the Southern U.S. This region is already well adapted to hot temperatures and the reduction of cold-related mortality drives overall lower mortality. Cities in the Northern U.S. are not well adapted to high temperatures, so the increase in heat-related mortality exceeds the reduction in cold-related mortality. Thus, while the total number of climate-related mortality may not change much, climate change will shift mortality to higher latitudes."
3368	Evidential	"Terminal lakes are important archives of continental hydroclimate and in some cases contain important economic resources. Here, we present an _2.9 m.y. lacustrine carbonate carbon and oxygen stable isotope record from a Great Basin continental drill core. We paired these measurements with bulk lithium concentrations to reveal a relationship between past climate and lithium enrichment in authigenic lacustrine clays. Further, we explored the possible effects of changing seasonality on the isotope record through the use of paired air mass trajectories and modern isotope data. Our findings show the evolution of the basin’s moisture balance over million-year time scales, which we attribute to variations in precipitation seasonality as well as fluctuations in the amount of evaporation associated with changes in atmospheric moisture convergence and divergence. We found a positive correlation between the oxygen isotope values of the lake carbonate and the bulk sediment lithium concentrations, which we argue is indicative of evapoconcentration of the lake environment and subsequent enrichment of the authigenic clays. Our results suggest a link between past hydroclimate changes and the formation of lithium-rich authigenic clays feeding high lithium concentrations in this modern brine aquifer system."
2250	Hypothetical	"Scientific discovery can be aided when data is shared following the principles of findability, accessibility, interoperability, reusability (FAIR) data (Wilkinson et al., 2016). Recent discussions in the palaeoclimate literature have focussed on defining the ideal database format for storing data and associated metadata. Here, we highlight an often overlooked primary process in widespread adoption of FAIR data, namely the systematic creation of machine readable data at source (i.e. at the field and laboratory level). We detail a file naming and structuring method that was used at LSCE to store data in text file format in a way that is machine-readable, and also human-friendly to persons of all levels of computer proficiency, thus encouraging the adoption of a machine-readable ethos at the very start of a project. Thanks to the relative simplicity of downcore palaeoclimate data, we demonstrate the power of this simple but powerful file format to function as a basic database in itself: we provide a Matlab-based GUI tool that allows users to search and visualise data by sediment core location, proxy type and species type. The adoption of similarily accessible, machine-readable file formats at other laboratories will promote data sharing within projects, while also allowing for the automation of submission of data to online database repositories with particular formatting and/or metadata requirements, thus reducing post-hoc workload."
5034	Evidential	"Tropical cyclones (TCs) mix vertical temperature gradients in the upper ocean and generate powerful near-inertial internal waves (NIWs) that propagate down into the deep ocean. Globally, downward mixing of heat during TC passage causes warming in the seasonal thermocline and pumps 0.15-0.6 PW of heat into the unventilated ocean. The final distribution of excess heat contributed by TCs is needed to understand subsequent consequences for climate; however, it is not well constrained by current observations. Here we show that NIWs generated by TCs drive thermocline mixing weeks after TC passage and thus greatly deepen the extent of downward heat transfer induced by TCs. Microstructure measurements of the turbulent diffusivity (_) and turbulent heat flux (Jq) in the Western Pacific before and after the passage of three TCs indicate that mean thermocline values of _ and Jq increased by factors of 2-7 and 2-4 (95% confidence level) respectively after TC passage. Excess mixing is shown to be associated with the vertical shear of NIWs, demonstrating that studies of TC-climate interactions ought to represent NIWs and their mixing to accurately capture TC effects on ocean stratification."
3472	Exploratory	"Regional weather networks–also referred to as mesonets–are imperative for filling in the spatial and temporal data gaps between nationally supported weather stations. The North Carolina Environment and Climate Observing Network (ECONet) fills this regional role; it is a mesoscale network of 44 (as of 2023) automated stations collecting 12 environmental variables every minute across North Carolina. Measured variables include air temperature, precipitation, relative humidity, barometric pressure, wind speed, wind direction, total solar radiation, photosynthetically active solar radiation, soil temperature, soil moisture, leaf wetness index, and black globe temperature. All data undergo quality control procedures and are made freely available to the public via data portals hosted by the State Climate Office of North Carolina at North Carolina State University. This paper provides a technical overview of ECONet, including a description of the siting criteria, station maintenance procedures, data quality control procedures, and data availability. We also summarize unique aspects of ECONet data collection as well as innovative research and applications that rely on ECONet data. ECONet data are used by many sectors including, but not limited to, emergency management, natural resources management, public health, agriculture, forestry, science education, outdoor recreation, and research. ECONet data and data-powered applications offer valuable insights to local, regional, and federal partners yet opportunities to expand ECONet research and applications remain."
2194	Evidential	"Hypothesized feedbacks between climate and tectonics are mediated by the relationship between topography and long-term erosion rates. While many studies show monotonic relationships between channel steepness and erosion rates, the degree of nonlinearity in this relationship varies by landscape. Mechanistically explaining controls on this relationship in natural settings is critical because highly nonlinear relationships imply low sensitivity between climate and tectonics. To this end, we present a coordinated analysis of cosmogenic 10Be concentrations in river sands paired with topographic, hydroclimatic, and tectonic data for the Greater Caucasus Mountains where topography is invariant along-strike despite large gradients in modern precipitation and convergence rates. We show that spatial patterns in erosion rates largely reflect regional tectonics with little sensitivity to mean precipitation or runoff. The nonlinearity in the erosion rate – steepness relationship may arise from very low runoff variability, which we attribute to the large contribution from snowmelt. Transitioning from rainfall- to snowmelt-driven runoff as mean elevation increases is common to many mid-latitude mountain ranges. The associated decrease in runoff variability may represent important, unrecognized dynamics inhibiting the sensitivity of tectonics to climate more broadly."
8343	Definitive	"Variable renewable energy (VRE) droughts are periods of low renewable electricity production due to natural variability in the weather and climate. These compound renewable energy droughts occur when two or more (typically wind and solar) generation sources are in low availability conditions at the same time. Compound wind and solar droughts are most commonly studied at the hourly and daily timescale due to the short-term nature of energy markets and battery storage capacity. However the seasonal time scale allows for the examination of broader climate and hydrologic patterns that influence a broader renewable energy portfolio and inform the needs for long-duration energy storage. In this study, we use a newly developed dataset of coincident renewable generation to characterize seasonal compound VRE droughts which include wind, solar and hydropower at grid-relevant spatial scales across the contiguous United States. Along with the frequency, duration, magnitude, and spatial scale, we specifically examine these climate patterns with a composite climate analysis. Results for the historical period (1982-2019) indicate that seasonal compound VRE droughts can last up to 5 months and occur most frequently in the Fall. While not an established ``climate stress'' to consider in reliability studies yet, we demonstrate the impact of seasonal energy droughts on a resource adequacy study over the Western US interconnection using a nodal bulk power grid model. We further discuss how seasonal compound VREs can inform the sizing of long-duration energy storage and market incentives to manage short-term extreme events like heat waves and cold snaps while considering seasonal conditions."
6579	Exploratory	"The 28th Conference of the Parties (COP28) included the first Global Stocktake (GST) as part of the implementation of the Paris Agreement. GST is a five-yearly assessment of the state and advancements in global climate action and aims to help national governments keep track of their climate ambitions and implementation progress. This paper contributes to the discussion through the analysis of harmonized country level datasets of metrics and indicators relevant for loss and damage analysis, survey information about people’s perceptions on climate change, projections of economic damages due to climate change. Indices are constructed to understand the association of the objective metrics of risk and vulnerability and the subjective perceptions of people in different countries. The analysis allows us to evaluate differences in vulnerability and countries where the dissonance between perceived and estimated climate change risks are larger and institutional strength and socioeconomic development are lagging. Combining the proposed indices, countries are ranked in terms of their current and future climate risk. An online tool is provided to visualize and access the results presented in this paper."
4792	Evidential	"Turbulent and radiative energy exchanges between lakes and the atmosphere play an important role in determining the process of lake-mixing and stratification, including how lakes respond to climate and to climate change. Here we use a one-dimensional hydrodynamic lake model to assess seasonal impacts of climate change on individual surface heat flux components in Lough Feeagh, Ireland, a deep, monomictic lake. We drive the lake model with an ensemble of outputs from four climate models under three future greenhouse gas scenarios from 1976 to 2099. In these experiments, the results showed significant increases in the radiative budget that were largely counteracted by significant increases in the turbulent fluxes. The combined change in the individual surface heat fluxes led to a change in the total surface heat flux that was small, but sufficient to lead to significant changes in the volume-weighted average lake. The largest change in total surface heat fluxes were in spring and autumn. Both spring heating and autumnal cooling significantly decreased under future climate conditions, while changes to total surface heat fluxes in winter and summer were an order of magnitude lower. This leads to the counter-intuitive results that in a warming world there will be less heat, not more, entering Lough Feeagh during the springtime, and little change in net heating over the summer or winter compared to natural climate, so that increases in the volume-weighted average lake temperature are largely due to reduced heat loss during autumn."
1847	Evidential	"A high-resolution climate projections dataset is obtained by statistically downscaling climate projections from the CMIP5 experiment using the ERA5-Land reanalyses from the Copernicus Climate Change service. The dataset is over Europe, has a spatial resolution of 0.10° x 0.10°, comprises 21 climate models and includes 5 surface daily variables: air temperature (mean, minimum, and maximum), precipitation, and mean near-surface wind speed. Two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios are available: one with mitigation policy (RCP4.5) and one without mitigation  (RCP8.5).  The downscaling method is a Quantile mapping method (QM) called the Cumulative Distribution Function transform (CDF-t) method that was first used for wind values and is now referenced in dozens of peer-reviewed publications. The data processing includes quality control of meta data according to the climate modeling community standards and value checking for outlier detection."
2807	Evidential	"The population structure of forests is shaped by balancing the opposing forces of regeneration and mortality, each of which influence C turnover rates and are sensitive to climate. Regeneration underlies the migrational potential of forests to climatic change and remains underserved in modeling studies. Our objective was to test the hypothesis that warming may reduce tree regeneration rates while amplifying fire regimes, producing forest loss. Absent sites within dispersal limits, trees may fail to track the velocity of warming, producing a decline in forested area. Long-term implications include changes to biogeochemical and energetic balances, species composition, and evolutionary trajectories. We performed hybrid model simulations to assess the resilience of forests to past-century conditions over the next fifty years in western Canada. We conducted simulations at a species-level taxonomic resolution to capture genotypic/phenotypic variability in response to climate. A recent shift toward small, frequent, human-caused fires and warming-reduced regeneration diminished species migration potential. The simulated rate of forest migration lagged behind temperature equilibria by 319 m yr-1. Understanding species migrational potential is particularly critical for northern forests, which have warmed at a rate twice the global mean. Our findings highlight the effect of diminished regeneration due to climatic change, a process neglected in current global-scale terrestrial biosphere models used in climate studies. We suggest that future terrestrial biosphere model studies incorporate these demographic rates in their findings on global change, as they carry substantial climatic and evolutionary implications."
1450	Exploratory	"As part of the COST Action HOME a dataset has been generated that will serve as a benchmark for homogenisation algorithms. Members of the Action and third parties have been invited and are still welcome to homogenise this dataset. The results of this exercise was analysed to obtain recommendations for a standard homogenisation procedure and are described in Venema et al. (Climate of the Past, 2012).   Chapter two discusses the generation of this benchmark dataset, the climate variables considered, which types of data are in the benchmark dataset, how they have been produced, the ways to introduce artificial inhomogeneities, and the additional specifications such as length, missing data and trends. This chapter is an updated version of a report (Venema et al., 2009), which was available to the participants. A draft for the properties of the benchmark was developed at a Working Group meeting and was approved by the Management Committee of the Cost Action.   The homogenized data that was returned by the participant is described in Chapter 3. In total 25 contributions have been returned before the deadline at which the truth was revealed. Multiple late contributions, submitted after the deadline, are also described. The descriptions of the contributions were written by the respective participants."
5182	Evidential	"In summertime and during heat events the urban heat island can negatively impact public health in urban areas. In the context of climate change, climate adaptation receives more attention in urban planning. Microscale urban climate modelling can identify risk areas and evaluate adaptation strategies. Concurrently, evaluating the model results with observational data is essential. So far, model evaluation is mostly limited to short-term field campaigns or a small number of stations. This study uses novel crowdsourcing data from Netatmo citizen weather stations (CWS) to evaluate the urban microscale model PALM for a hot day (Tmax ≥ 30 °C) in Bochum in western Germany with anticyclonic atmospheric conditions. Urban-rural air temperature differences are represented by the model. A quality control procedure is applied to the crowdsourced data prior to evaluation. The comparison between the model and the crowdsourced air temperature data reveals a good model performance with a high coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.86 to 0.88 and a root mean squared error (RMSE) around 2 K. Model accuracy shows a temporal pattern and night-time air temperatures during the night are underestimated by the model, likely due to unresolved cloud cover. The crowdsourced air temperature data proved valuable for model evaluation due to the high number of stations within urban areas. Nevertheless, weaknesses related to data quality such as radiation errors must be considered during model evaluation and only the information derived from multiple stations is suitable for model evaluation. The procedure presented here can easily be transferred to planning processes as the model and the crowdsourced air temperature data are freely available. This can contribute to making informed decisions for climate adaptation in urban areas."
2493	Evidential	"The generation of mantle melts in response to decompression by glacial unloading has been linked to enhanced volcanic activity and volatile release in Iceland and in global eruptive records. However, it is unclear whether this process is also important in magmatically-active systems that do not show evidence of enhanced eruption rates. For example, the deglaciation of the Yellowstone ice cap did not observably enhance volcanism, yet Yellowstone may still have released large volumes of CO2 to the surface due to the crystallization of melts at depth. Here we develop models to simulate mantle melt production and volatile release associated with the deglaciation of Yellowstone and Iceland. In agreement with previous work, we find mantle melt production in Iceland is enhanced 33-fold during deglaciation, generating an additional 3728 km3 of melt and releasing an additional 31–51 Gt of CO2. Beneath Yellowstone, we find mantle melt production is comparably enhanced 19-fold during deglaciation, generating an additional 815 km3 of melt, though thicker lithosphere may prevent the transport of this melt to the surface. These melts segregate an additional 135–230 Gt of CO2 from the mantle, representing a ~23–39% increase of the global volcanic CO2 flux (if degassed during deglaciation). Our results suggest deglaciation-enhanced mantle melting is important in continental settings with partially molten mantle (potentially Greenland and West Antarctica) and may result in positive feedbacks between deglaciation and climate warming."
5012	Evidential	"It is well established that the Earth’s long-term orbital variation affects global climate through insolation changes, particularly with respect to glacial cycles. However, there is little research into the impact of this slowly varying insolation forcing on timescales well below the smallest main periodicity, the precession, of ~ 21,000 years. Here, intermediate complexity climate modelling demonstrates that allowing a smooth annual variation in orbital parameters and atmospheric CO2 levels through 4,000 years of a glacial climate simulation leads to significantly more variability on a range of timescales in key measures of oceanic climate, compared to simulations with combinations of fixed or variable forcing. This includes a more vigorous ocean overturning circulation on a global basis. These results raise the possibility that past climate change signals, often ascribed to internal natural variability, may instead be initiated by slowly-evolving external orbital and atmospheric CO2 variation."
5025	Evidential	"Previous research has mainly considered economic factors and personal psychological factors (e.g., personal pro-environmental attitudes) as determinants of investment behavior for renewable energies. However, less is known about how social identities, i.e. the human capacity to think and act as a member of a social group, can shape green investment behavior. Combining insights from economics and psychology, the current research investigates if collective pro-environmental motivation (e.g., pro-environmental ingroup norms, collective climate efficacy beliefs) can uniquely add to the explanation of investment decisions and the acceptance of policies for renewable energies. Results from a multi-country survey (31 European countries, N = 18,037), including a discrete choice experiment, showed that collective pro-environmental motivation was positively correlated with the acceptance of green energy policies and negatively correlated with discounting of future benefits (money discount rate) in investment decisions for renewable energies. Importantly, collective pro-environmental motivation remained a significant predictor of policy acceptance and the discount rate after controlling for personal pro-environmental motivation. Furthermore, the associations between collective pro-environmental motivation and our outcome measures were stronger for respondents highly identified with their group compared to low identifiers. Our findings suggest that collective pro-environmental motivation provides a unique opportunity to increase support for and participation in the transformation towards carbon-neutrality."
1181	Evidential	"Oceanic transports through the Arctic gateways represent an integral part of the polar climate system, but comprehensive in-situ-based estimates of this quantity have been lacking in the past. New observation-based estimates of oceanic volume, temperature and freshwater transports have recently become available. Those estimates have been derived from moored observations in the four major gateways by applying mass and salinity constraints. We seize this opportunity to compare a recent ocean reanalysis with those observation-based estimates. First, time series of integrated volume transports through each strait are considered, along with the net heat transport into the Arctic Ocean. Good agreement is found for Davis Strait volume transports, but considerable disagreement of up to 1.1 Sv in Fram Strait and the Barents Sea Opening. The annual mean net volume export through the gateways is - 0.03 ¬± 0.23 Sv in the reanalysis, weaker than the - 0.15 ¬± 0.06 Sv derived from the observation-based estimate (uncertainties represent the monthly standard deviation). The net ocean heat transport to the Arctic Ocean is similar in the two datasets (observation-based: 153 ¬± 44 TW, reanalysis: 145 ¬± 35 TW). Discrepancies in the integrated transports are further investigated by studying cross-sections of velocity and potential temperature. These reveal good qualitative agreement in all straits, but considerable differences in the strength of major features like the East Greenland Current and the West Spitzbergen Current. Examination of the instrumental coverage reveals that areas of discrepancy are often co-located with poorly observed regions. In conclusion, both types of data sets have their merits and are recommended to be used complementarily for climate studies in this data-sparse region. The results presented in this study can contribute to the planning of future observational efforts and to the development of ocean reanalysis products."
4754	Definitive	"Quantitative investigations of ancient rivers usually provide insights into either instantaneous or mean flow conditions. There is a critical gap between these timescales of investigation which reflects the intermittency of flow and sediment transport, and closing this gap is crucial to fully explore the dynamics and evolution of ancient fluvial landscapes. Here, we combine fluvial stratigraphic datasets, flow and sediment transport models, and paleoclimate general circulation model (GCM) results to develop new methods to estimate intermittency in the geological past, specifically flow intermittency factors (Iw) and sediment transport intermittency factors (Is). We illustrate these methods for the Upper Cretaceous Last Chance Ferron Sandstone, Utah, USA. For sand-transporting flow conditions in Last Chance Ferron rivers, we estimate Iw values of 0.54_0.90, which imply that channel-forming flows were sustained for the majority of the year, consistent with perennial systems in which relatively large discharges are sustained. In contrast, for gravel-transporting flow conditions, Iw values of 0.28_0.38 suggest that the largest formative flows may have occupied Last Chance Ferron rivers for nearly a third of the year, which could be explained by a monsoonal system in which high magnitude discharge events are sustained, or a subtropical system in which high magnitude discharge events have short durations but high frequencies. Meanwhile, Is values of 0.075_0.15 suggest that annual sediment budgets could have been transported in as little as 10 days, but up to 2 months, if channel-forming conditions were sustained, and highlight that small changes to the duration of channel-forming conditions could significantly impact sediment budgets. These results are consistent with independent facies- and proxy-based insights into Last Chance Ferron rivers, which point to a perennially wet system characterized by a monsoonal or subtropical discharge regime. Our results highlight new opportunities to use paleoclimate GCMs to constrain intermittency in the geological past. Going forward, paleoclimate GCMs will be particularly useful where the rock record is incomplete or inaccessible, or where stratigraphic approaches are limited, and will enable us to tackle pertinent research questions pertaining to past surface processes on both Earth and other planets."
1673	Hypothetical	"Thermohaline oceanic currents influence global heat transfer, controlling local and global variations in climate, biodiversity, and the terrestrial biosphere. Paleoceanographic studies typically use biostratigraphic and geochemical proxies to reconstruct the dynamics of these currents in Earth‚Äôs ancient oceans, although seismic reflection data have also been successfully employed, most commonly in the North Atlantic Ocean. Here we use 2D seismic reflection data from the Ceduna Sub-basin, Great Australian Bight, offshore southern Australia to describe middle Eocene-to-Recent contourites deposited within an overall carbonate-dominated succession. These deposits comprise large (100 m wavelength by up to 50 m tall) bedforms and deep (10‚Äì90 m), wide (up to 3 km) erosional scours. The scours are particularly well-developed at one specific stratigraphic level, defining moats that encircle Middle Eocene shield volcanoes, which formed syn-depositional bathymetric highs. We suggest that sediment erosion, transport, and deposition record middle Eocene initiation of the Leeuwin Current, one of the most important ocean currents in the southern hemisphere. Deepest seabed scouring occurs within the middle of the middle Eocene-to-Recent sequence, and may reflect middle Miocene waxing of the so-called ‚Äòproto-Leeuwin Current‚Äô, possibly driven by changes in ocean circulation patterns caused by the Miocene Global Optimum. The results of this seismic reflection-based study are consistent with results derived from other paleoceanographic proxies, thereby highlighting the continued key role seismic reflection data have in understanding the occurrence, geographical distribution, and significance of ancient ocean currents."
7648	Definitive	"This study looks at how Ethiopia's East Wallaga Zone's staple crop yields are affected by climate variability between 1990 and 2022. The main goal is to evaluate the effects of temperature and precipitation variations on the production of important crops, namely wheat and teff, in the highlands, midlands, and lowlands of various agroecological zones. The Ethiopian Meteorological Institute, CHIRPS, and TerraClimate were the sources of the climate data used to provide a thorough picture of the trends in temperature and precipitation during the study period. Significant spatiotemporal changes in the research area's climate patterns were found through data analysis. To measure these fluctuations, important metrics like precipitation concentration, rainfall anomaly indices, and coefficients of variation were computed. Crop yield data from the Zonal Agricultural Office was also used in the study. A regression model was used to examine the association between climatic conditions and crop yields. With a response rate of 95% and a sample size that contained information from each of the three agroecological zones, strong statistical analysis was guaranteed. An 8.2% coefficient of variation in precipitation is one of the significant findings, indicating subtle but important changes in rainfall patterns, namely in the quantity and timing of wet days. Furthermore, a discernible rise in both minimum and maximum temperatures has occurred, particularly in lowland regions, and this has had an additional impact on crop yield. Strong relationships between crop yields and climatic variables, especially rainfall and mean annual temperature, were found via regression analysis. These findings highlight how crucial it is to put adaptive techniques into practice in order to maintain and improve agricultural productivity in the face of persistent climatic unpredictability. The research comes to the conclusion that although meteorological conditions have a major influence on crop yields, non-climatic factors including soil fertility, agronomic techniques, and technology improvements also have a major impact. The study suggests a three-pronged strategy to reduce the negative effects of climate change on agriculture: raising fertilizer use, strengthening agronomic practices, and increasing soil fertility. The report also emphasizes how important it is to combine measures for adapting to climate change with initiatives to resolve political unrest and advance sustainable agricultural methods. It is recommended that policymakers give equal weight to measures aimed at mitigating and adapting to climate change in order to enhance agricultural productivity and guarantee food security in the area. In East Wallaga Zone and elsewhere, this strategy is crucial for improving lives and feeding the constantly expanding population."
6917	Exploratory	"We present the concept and capabilities of IGM (https://github.com/jouvetg/igm), a Python-based modeling tool designed for efficiently simulating glacier evolution across various scales. IGM integrates ice thermomechanics, climate-driven surface mass balance, mass conservation, and other processes. Within IGM, the update of all physical model components involves a series of mathematical operations on horizontal raster grids, performed by the Tensorflow library. This design choice results in high parallelization capabilities, particularly beneficial when executed on GPU hardware. The most challenging aspect of parallelization within IGM is the ice flow model, which leverages a physics-informed convolutional neural network trained from high-order ice flow physics. Conversely, components like the positive-degree day surface mass balance or the enthalpy thermal scheme take advantage of pixel-wise parallelization. Beyond its computational efficiency, IGM offers a user-friendly coding structure and modularity to promote community development, an OGGM-based module for accessing the data, data assimilation through underlying automatic differentiation tools, and post-processing vizualization routines. We present a comprehensive workflow, which includes data preprocessing, inverse and forward modeling, and rendering of results, enabling the rapid modeling of any mountain glacier globally by providing its RGI ID within a few minutes."
2008	Evidential	"Reducing methane emissions from oil and gas systems is a central component of US and international climate policy. Leak detection and repair (LDAR) programs using optical gas imaging (OGI) based surveys are routinely used to mitigate fugitive emissions or leaks. Recently, new technologies and platforms such as planes, drones, and satellites promise more cost-effective methane mitigation than existing approaches. To be approved for use in LDAR programs, new technologies must demonstrate equivalent emissions mitigation to existing approaches. In this work, we use the FEAST modeling tool to (a) identify cost vs. mitigation trade-offs that arise from the use of new technologies, and (b) provide a framework for effective design of alternative LDAR programs. We identify several critical insights. First, new technologies and tiered LDAR programs can achieve equivalent emissions reductions at lower cost as current OGI-based approaches by varying survey frequency. Second, low median detection threshold technologies can trade sensitivity for speed without sacrificing mitigation outcomes. Third, emissions mitigation from technologies with high median detection thresholds have an effective upper bound independent of the survey frequency. Finally, vented emissions play a critical role in the cost-effectiveness of tiered detection programs that direct ground crews based on site-level emissions detection. The FEAST model will enable operators and regulators to systematically evaluate the role of new technologies in next generation LDAR programs."
4607	Evidential	"Photochemical reactions initiated by ultraviolet (UV) radiation remove the climate-active gas dimethylsulfide (DMS) from the ocean’s surface layer. Here we quantified DMS photolysis using a satellite-based model that accounts for spectral irradiance attenuation in the water column, its absorption by chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM), and the apparent quantum yields (AQYs) with which absorbed photons photodegrade DMS. Models with two alternative parameterizations for AQY estimate global DMS photolysis at between 17 and 20 Tg S/yr, equivalent to 13–15 Tg C/yr, of which ~73% occurs in the Southern hemisphere. This asymmetry results mostly from the high AQYs found south of 40°S, which more than counteract the prevailing low irradiance and deep mixing in that region. Simplified schemes currently used in biogeochemical models, whereby photolysis is proportional to visible radiation, likely overestimate DMS photolysis by around 150% globally. We propose relevant corrections and simple adjustments to those models."
1345	Evidential	"Ongoing increase in human and climate pressures, in addition to the lack of monitoring initiatives, makes the Caatinga one of the most vulnerable forests in the world. The Caatinga is located in the semi-arid region of Brazil and its vegetation phenology is highly dependent on precipitation, which has a high spatial and temporal variability. Under these circumstances, satellite image-based methods are valued due to their ability to uncover human-induced changes from climate effects on land cover. In this study, a time series stack of 670 Landsat images over a period of 31 years (1985–2015) was used to investigate spatial and temporal patterns of land-cover clearing (LCC) due to vegetation removal in an area of the Caatinga. We compared the LCC detection accuracy of three spectral indices, i.e., the surface albedo (SA), the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) and the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). We applied a residual trend analysis (TSS-RESTREND) to attenuate seasonal climate effects on the vegetation time series signal and to detect only significant structural changes (breakpoints) from monthly Landsat time series. Our results show that SA was able to identify the general occurrence of LCC and the year that it occurred with a higher accuracy (89 and 62%, respectively) compared to EVI (44 and 22%) and NDVI (46 and 22%). The overall outcome of the study shows the benefits of using Landsat time series and a spectral index that incorporates the short-wave infrared range, such as the SA, compared to visible and near-infrared vegetation indices for monitoring LCC in seasonally dry forests such as the Caatinga."
2227	Exploratory	"Icebergs have a significant influence on local and potentially global climate by altering ocean and sea ice environments. An object-based method for automatic iceberg detection has been applied to 2442 SAR images acquired during all seasons between 2006-2012 in the Amundsen Sea Embayment (ASE), Antarctica. During this period a total count of icebergs and their surface area were calculated in different seasons and months. There is a clear seasonal variability in icebergs number and surface area in the ASE. The highest values of both parameters are observed during austral winter, the lowest during austral summer. The changes concern mostly the icebergs smaller than 2 km2 and pertain to the area north of the Pine Island Bay. A general westward drift of icebergs was observed in the ASE shelf area. The drift patterns and the seasonal variation of the distribution indicate that the drift of icebergs in the northern part of the ASE is strongly modulated by sea ice. They indicate mostly allochtonous origin of those bergs (icebergs imported from the Bellingshausen Sea represent about 25-35% of the total surface area of mobile icebergs in the Amundsen Sea). This is a new result not previously studied in the literature."
2597	Hypothetical	"Extreme wind events affect lake phytoplankton amongst others by deepening the mixed layer and increasing internal nutrient loading. Both increases and decreases of phytoplankton biomass after storms have been observed, but the precise mechanisms driving these responses remain poorly understood or quantified. In this study, we coupled a one-dimensional physical model to a biogeochemical model to investigate the factors regulating short-term phytoplankton responses to summer storms, now and under expected warmer future conditions. We simulated physical, chemical and biological dynamics in Lake Erken, Sweden, and found that wind storms could increase or decrease the phytoplankton concentration one week after the storm, depending on antecedent lake physical and chemical conditions. Storms had little effect on phytoplankton biomass if the mixed layer was deep prior to storm exposure. Higher incoming shortwave radiation and hypolimnetic nutrient concentration boosted growth, whereas higher surface water temperatures decreased phytoplankton concentration after storms. Medium-intensity wind speeds resulted in more phytoplankton biomass after storms than high-intensity wind. Simulations under a future climate scenario did not show marked differences in the way wind affects phytoplankton growth following storms. Our study shows that storm impacts on lake phytoplankton are complex and likely to vary as a function of local environmental conditions."
3435	Definitive	"Seagrass beds offer unique and vital ecological services as an important blue carbon ecosystem in coastal wetlands. Zostera japonica is an intertidal seagrass species native to eastern Asia and is one of the most widely distributed seagrass species in China. However, little is known on the long-term variations of Z. japonica extents. Automatic mapping method for Z. japonica seagrass beds is in urgent need to fill this knowledge gap. In this study, we proposed a new SeaGrass Index (SGI) for automatic and rapid mapping of Z. japonica based on time-series Landsat satellite imagery, aiming to alleviate the influence of tidal inundation and enhance the separability from other coastal cover types. The SGI considers both spectral and phenological characteristics of Z. japonica, as well as the spatial location of Z. japonica. We took the Yellow River Delta (YRD), China as our study area, where Z. japonica was first discovered and reported in 2015. Based on SGI, Z. japonica extents during 1985-2018 were extracted using multi-Otsu thresholding algorithm. Accuracy assessments based on field investigations and high-resolution imagery showed that SGI has successfully separated seagrass beds from other cover types, especially intertidal salt marshes, with overall accuracies >95%, producer’s accuracies >90% and user’s accuracies >94%. Our study provides the first long-term maps of seagrass beds in YRD. The area of Z. japonica showed large variations during 1985-2018, ranging from 149 ha in 2005-2006 to 1302.9 ha in 2011-2012. The spatial distribution of Z. japonica varied with the morphological change of the estuary caused by river channel shifts. Since 2011, Z. japonica seagrass beds have undergone area degradation due to the invasion of S. alterniflora. The area was only 332.3 ha in 2017-2018. Coastal erosion and extreme climate events such as drought and typhoon might also explain degradation of seagrass beds in YRD. We expect that the SGI will advance automatic and rapid mapping methods for intertidal seagrass beds, and the Z. japonica maps will provide a baseline data for restoration and management of seagrasses at regional scale."
2302	Evidential	"As a result of altitude and latitude amplified climate change, widespread changes in vegetation composition, density and distribution have been observed across northern regions. Despite wide documentation of shrub proliferation and treeline advance, few field-based studies have evaluated the hydrological implications of these changes. Quantification of total evapotranspiration (ET) across a range of vegetation gradients is essential for predicting water yield, yet challenging in cold alpine catchments due to heterogeneous land cover, including both boreal forest and shrub taiga ecosystems. Here, we present six years of surface energy balance components and ET dynamics at three sites along an elevational gradient in a subarctic, alpine catchment near Whitehorse, Yukon Territory, Canada. These sites span a gradient of thermal and vegetation regimes, providing a space-for-time comparison for future ecosystem shifts: 1) a low-elevation boreal white spruce forest (~12-20 m), 2) a mid-elevation subalpine taiga comprised of tall, dense willow (Salix) and birch (Betula) shrubs (~1-3 m) and 3) a high-elevation subalpine taiga with short, sparse shrub cover (< 0.75 m) and moss, lichen, and bare rock. Eddy covariance instrumentation ran year-round at the forest and during the growing season at the two shrub sites. Total ET decreased and interannual variability increased with elevation, with mean May to September ET totals of 349 (±3) mm at the forest, 249 (±10) mm at the tall, dense shrub site, and 240 (± 26) mm at the short, sparse shrub site. Comparatively, over the same period, ET:R ratios were the highest and most variable at the forest (2.19 ± 0.37) and similar at the tall, dense shrub (1.22 ± 0.09) and short, sparse shrub (1.14 ± 0.05) sites.  Our results suggest that advances in treeline will increase overall ET and lower interannual variability; however, the large growing season water deficit at the forest indicates strong reliance on soil moisture from late fall and snowmelt recharge.  In contrast, ET was considerably less at the cooler higher elevation shrub sites, which exhibited similar ET losses over 6 years despite differences in shrub height and abundance. ET rates between the two shrub sites were similar throughout the year, except during the peak growing season. Greater interannual variability in ET at the short, sparse shrub site indicates the reduced influence of vegetation controls on ET.  Results suggest that predicted changes in vegetation type and structure in northern regions will have a considerable impact on water partitioning and will vary in a complex way in response to changing precipitation timing, phase and magnitude, growing season length, and vegetation snow and rain interactions."
5515	Evidential	"A severe contributor to global warming, Methane (CH4) is a significant element of Green House Gases (GHGs). Both anthropogenic and natural sources are responsible for its emission. The development of satellites for remote sensing has made it convenient to study the spatiotemporal distribution of any gaseous component. Tropospheric Monitoring Instrument (TROPOMI) integrated with Sentinel-5 Precursor (Sentinel-5P) satellite is proven efficient in studying CH4. Sentinel-5P TROPOMI CH4 data from February 2019 to September 2022 has been used to research southwest districts with the Sundarbans mangrove forest. Besides, satellite data from MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer), ERA5 and Climate Hazards Group Infrared Precipitation with Station data (CHIRPS) are used to analyse methane changes from 2019 to 2022. All these diverse datasets have been retrieved by using Google Earth Engine (GEE) platform. CH4 emission shows an increasing trend over the study area. The emission rate is higher (more than 1900 to 1950 ppb) in all districts during the dry winter season, especially from January to March. Particularly, cropland and water have regular and higher emissions. On the contrary, bare ground and rangeland have irregular and higher emissions. Built area exerts higher emission trend (more than 1900 ppb) in Satkhira district. All districts, including the Sundarbans, have shown positive relation with Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI), indicating single cropland and shrimp aquaculture as significant emitters. The presence of massive vegetation and waterbodies in the Sundarbans is responsible for low emissions (below 1900 ppb). Sundarbans have been found with an anomalous correlation with meteorological variables. Apart from the anthropogenic perspective, there could also be potential environmental and geological sources of CH4 emissions."
6271	Exploratory	"Enhanced and effective hydrological monitoring plays a crucial role in understanding water-related processes in a rapidly changing world. This paper explores the challenges and opportunities associated with image-based hydrological monitoring techniques, and highlights the need for innovative approaches and technologies to overcome existing limitations. Image-based hydrological monitoring has shown to significantly enhance data collection, improve analysis and accuracy, and support effective and timely decision-making. The integration of remote and proximal sensing technologies, with the powers of big data analytics, and artificial intelligence are revolutionizing hydrological monitoring practices. By addressing these challenges and harnessing their potential, hydrological monitoring can evolve to meet the growing demands of water resources in order to face climate change and human needs. The present study reviews showcases and good practices of enhanced hydrological monitoring in different applications, reflecting the strengths and limitations of new approaches."
8054	Definitive	"Glaciers adapt slowly to changing climatic conditions, resulting in long-term changes in their mass with implications for sea level rise and water supply, even if the climate were to stabilize. Using eight glacier evolution models, we simulate global glacier evolution over multi-centennial timescales, allowing glaciers to equilibrate with climate under various constant global temperature scenarios. We estimate glaciers globally will lose 39% of their mass, relative to 2020, corresponding to a global mean sea-level rise of 113 mm even if temperatures stabilized at present-day conditions. Under the +1.5°C target of the Paris Agreement, more than twice as much global glacier mass remains at equilibration (53% vs. 24%) compared to the mass projected under the warming level resulting from current policies (+2.7°C by 2100 above pre-industrial). Our findings stress the need for stringent mitigation policies to ensure long-term preservation of glaciers around the globe."
3439	Evidential	"Uttarakhand region in the NW Himalaya has experienced two extreme climatic-geomorphic events within last 10 years that killed more than 6000 people. Though these events, like many others in the Himalaya, have been attributed to climate-change and anthropogenic disturbances, identification of potential hotspots of land use/land cover change is rarely attempted to make future inferences for disaster risk reduction. An evaluation of spatio-temporal changes in land use/land cover can be used to identify such hotspots. Therefore, we analysed the spatio-temporal changes in a climatically sensitive and natural disaster-prone area (~28856 km2) of Uttarakhand (NW Himalaya), India, by comparing the satellite data of years 1991-2020 for ten land use/land cover elements to track the spatio-temporal changes over these years. Results revealed the formation of two hotspots exhibiting relatively more changes in land use/land cover pattern. Though the anthropogenic influence is observed in both hotspots, the influence of spatio-temporally changing climatic parametres is also noted. In view of frequent extreme climatic-geomorphic events, temporally increasing population and tourist pressure, and temporally changing climatic conditions, it is vital to identify hotspots having dominant changes in land use/land cover to understand the possible source of potential disasters."
8323	Definitive	"It is time for faithful and trustworthy world leaders to lead in establishing a “Global Cap-and-Trade regulatory framework” to change our course promptly. This framework aims to establish an institutional mechanism that ensures steadily decreasing global emission limits. The Scheme regulates upstream entities that import or produce fossil fuels, with the initiation of countries that share the objective and choose to participate voluntarily, and guides us toward a global carbon-neutral economy.  In addition, the Scheme can enable a major global paradigm shift not only for climate issue but also for financing SDGs, and addressing fossil fuel resource concerns, notably:   (a) a global emissions cap trajectory setting based on the pre-agreed remaining gross carbon budget to be decided by the CMA of the Paris Agreement; (b) initiated by a highly conscious club of countries and building in incentives for other countries to participate; (c) a fully auctioning upstream-type regulatory scheme with a single market of international allowance as a new energy commodity [for supply-side of fossil fuels];  (d) a uniform—theoretically ideal—international carbon pricing scheme to realise the minimum cost (and no need for the border adjustment), as an external common factor, while it respects national sovereignty [for demand-side of energy];  (e) becoming an economic framework with no need for awareness of CO2 ceiling explicitly [for demand-side of energy];  (f) generation of a trillion-dollar auctioning proceeds stream—equivalent to an agreed amount of total financial transfer at the COP29—for financing SDGs and regressive mitigation for low-income people, and incentivising developing countries for participation; (g) together with a carbon crediting scheme enabling fossil fuel production without limitation by carbon capture and storage (CCS) [for supply-side of fossil fuels]; and (h) enhanced fossil fuels predictability for production investment [supply-side] and effective utilisation [demand-side] under clear rules with a price stabilisation effect.  We look forward to the strong will of current world leaders for future generations."
2773	Definitive	"Heavy rainfall drives a range of eruptive and noneruptive volcanic hazards; over the Holocene, the incidence of many such hazards has increased due to rapid climate change. Here we show that extreme heavy rainfall is projected to increase with continued global warming throughout the 21st century in most subaerial volcanic regions, dramatically increasing the potential for rainfall-induced volcanic hazards. This result is based on a comparative analysis of nine general circulation models, and is prevalent across a wide range of spatial scales, from countries and volcanic arcs down to individual volcanic systems.  Our results suggest that if global warming continues unchecked, the incidence of primary and secondary rainfall-related volcanic activity—such as dome explosions or flank collapse—will increase at more than 700 volcanoes around the globe. Improved coupling between scientific observations—in particular, of local and regional precipitation—and policy decisions, may go some way towards mitigating the increased risk throughout the next 80 years."
3303	Hypothetical	"Coal-to-gas switching in the power sector, as happened in the US, has been a key driver of near-term greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Can this success be replicated around the world? Here, we explore the limits of a global, plant-level, coal-to-gas transition arising from pipeline availability constraints. Globally, only 43% of coal capacity is within 14 km of a nearby pipeline, the median distance for recent coal-to-gas conversions. Furthermore, plant-to-pipeline distance distributions vary widely – only 30% of coal capacity in India is within 14 km of a nearby pipeline. Most global coal fleets are in the intermediate space of balancing two competing interests – having a young coal fleet with high avoided emissions potential through coal-to-gas switching but without access to low-cost gas resources. A global stocktake based on coal fleet age, pipeline access, and natural gas supply security suggests that a coal-to-gas transition is unlikely to be a universal climate solution."
5347	Evidential	"Managed retreat is an increasingly important management option for responding to the localized impacts of climate change and poses a complex governance challenge. Floodplain property buyouts represent the largest form of managed retreat currently underway in the U.S. and have been broadly studied as disaster response policy using large national datasets. Research on the local governance dimensions of property buyouts remains limited but critically needed to inform ongoing buyout programs and the design of future retreat efforts. This paper contributes new knowledge of the local governance dimensions of property buyouts and managed retreat by studying forty towns in Vermont that completed property buyouts along streams and rivers following catastrophic flooding in 2011. Using statewide and town-level datasets, measures of the watershed context of each buyout, and qualitative interviews this research seeks to understand the social, institutional, and environmental variables that led some towns to implement many buyouts while other similarly flood-impacted towns implemented far fewer. Results indicate that lower income towns implemented more buyouts and fluvial erosion had an outsized role in driving flood losses on buyout sites. Measures of town governance capacity and local governance paradigm are found to influence the occurrence of property buyouts in complex and unexpected ways. Findings depict how property buyouts are a highly localized process that requires cross-scale governance and hinges upon pre-existing social and institutional networks, local leaders, and trust. Buyouts and retreat processes emerge as a stage for opposing notions over the role of government, landowner rights, and economic development to be contested at the floodplain parcel scale. Findings also demonstrate the limitations of property buyouts in geographically constrained landscapes that are perceived as being bound to risk. Federal buyout programs tend to be unresponsive to local nuance and risk perpetuating systemic inequities where buyout and retreat governance processes cannot be reconciled with local context. These findings can inform the design and administration of buyout and retreat programs to better empower frontline communities to respond to changing environments."
8514	Evidential	"How glaciation affects CO2 drawdown by chemical weathering sets the strength of the weathering-climate feedback, which controls the exogenic carbon cycle and planetary habitability (Kump et al., 2000). However, the exact role of glaciers remains elusive as glaciation alters multiple factors controlling weathering, the net effect of which is ambiguous even in directionality. While illustrative, modern observations have limited ability to constrain time-dependent behavior, which is thought to be important to glacial weathering (Vance et al., 2009; Kemeny et al., 2021). To isolate and quantify the effect of glaciers over millennial timescales, we developed a novel multi-proxy system for constraining catchment-scale fluxes in the past. This approach utilizes the correlation between Ge/Si and Si isotope ratios in modern rivers, which sensitively tracks weathering processes, and the preservation of these signals in biogenic silica in lake sediments. We report changes in weathering fluxes in two catchments with different glacial histories during the past ten thousand years from two lacustrine records in Iceland. We find that the chemical weathering fluxes are an order of magnitude higher in the same catchment when glaciated compared to when ice free. The synchronous variations in weathering fluxes with the expansion and contraction of glaciers indicate a rapid effect of glaciation that may amplify climatic variations via a positive feedback."
6943	Hypothetical	"Forest aboveground biomass (AGB) is a crucial indicator for monitoring carbon and requires accurate quantification. This study aimed to advance AGB estimation using open access Earth observation (EO) data and cloud computing, focusing on Alabama, USA. The specific objectives were to: (1) develop a workflow for creating a 30 m forest AGBD map with GEDI, using GEE, (2) evaluate and compare GEDI-derived maps from ecoregion-specific models with estimates derived from a generalized modeling approach, and (3) compare GEDI-derived AGBD map with existing field inventory data and global AGB product. Utilizing GEE, GEDI footprint-level (~25 m diameter) AGBD was extrapolated with EO and ancillary data by employing random forest machine learning. Two estimation approaches were assessed: statewide and ecoregion-specific models for Alabama's six ecoregions. Ecoregion models showed superior accuracy (R¬≤: 0.34‚Äì0.73; RMSE: 49.09‚Äì53.78 Mg/ha) compared to the statewide model (R¬≤: 0.32; RMSE: 70.48 Mg/ha). Validation with Forest Inventory and Analysis data and the European Space Agency Climate Change Initiative AGBD yielded R¬≤ of 0.50 and 0.81, and RMSE of 33.95 Mg/ha and 83.12 Mg/ha, respectively. The study underscores the importance of ecoregion-specific modeling and demonstrates the potential of open-access EO data and platforms in advancing AGB estimation."
6418	Evidential	"Ground temperatures have been monitored since 2014 in four shallow boreholes (up to 5.7 m deep) drilled in palsas along the southeastern Labrador Sea coastline. This borehole network is critical for monitoring the effects of climate change on the terrestrial cryosphere and includes some of the southernmost coastal permafrost in the Northern Hemisphere. In this region, there are very few published measurements of active layer thickness, permafrost thickness, and permafrost temperatures. Mean annual ground temperatures of -1.7 to -0.7°C at 1 m depth were surprisingly low at the beginning of the study period, given the relatively thin bodies of permafrost present (<3 m thick). Statistically significant increases in ground temperatures were observed from 2015 to 2022 at some but not all depths in the four boreholes, despite decreases in permafrost thickness observed at all sites. Permafrost thaw resulted from both increased thaw penetration and thaw from the base of permafrost. Thaw penetration relative to the original ground surface increased by 24 to 92% due to a combination of active layer thickening and ground subsidence. Permafrost thaw at these sensitive locations may be driven by changes in mean annual air temperature, vegetation, snow dynamics, hydrology, and human disturbance. These data provide novel insights into the sensitivity of permafrost in this understudied region and can be used to validate predictive thermal modelling under future climate scenarios."
6749	Exploratory	"Understanding climate and vegetation trends and variations is essential for conservation planning and ecosystem management. These elements are shaped by regional manifestations of global climate change, impacting biodiversity conservation and dynamics. In the southern hemisphere, global climate change is partially reflected through trends in the hemispheric El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation (SOI) and regional oscillations such as the Indian Ocean Dipole Mode (DMI). These phenomena influence rainfall and temperature changes, making it crucial to understand their patterns and interdependencies. Appropriately analyzing these variables and their interrelations therefore requires a robust multivariate statistical model, a tool seldom employed to extract patterns in climate and vegetation time series. Widely used univariate statistical methods in this context fall short, as they do not account for interdependencies and covariation between multiple time series. State-space models, both univariate and multivariate, adeptly analyze structural time series by decomposing them into trends, cycles, seasonal, and irregular patterns. Multivariate state-space models, in particular, can provide deeper insights into trends and variations by accounting for interdependencies and covariation but are rarely used. We use both univariate and multivariate state models to uncover trends and variations in historic rainfall, temperature, and vegetation for the Greater Mara-Serengeti Ecosystem in Kenya and Tanzania and potential influences of oceanic and atmospheric oscillations. The univariate and multivariate patterns reveal several insights. For example, rainfall is bimodal, shows significant interannual variability but stable seasonality. Wet and dry seasons display strong, compensating quasi-cyclic oscillations, leading to stable annual averages. Rainfall was above average in both seasons from 2010-2020, influenced by global warming and the Indian Ocean Dipole. The ecosystem experienced recurrent severe droughts, erratic wet conditions and a substantial temperature rise over six decades (3.3 to 4.2 ¬∞C). The insights gained have important implications for developing strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on ecosystems, biodiversity, and human wellfare."
3447	Exploratory	"In recent years, the use of deep learning methods has rapidly increased in many research fields. Similarly, they have become a powerful tool within the climate scientific community. Deep learning methods have been successfully applied for different tasks, such as identification of atmospheric patterns, weather extreme classification, or weather forecasting. However, due to the inherent complexity of the atmospheric processes, the ability of deep learning models to simulate natural processes, such as precipitation, is still challenging. Therefore, a thorough evaluation of their performance and robustness in predicting precipitation fields is still needed, especially for extreme precipitation events, which can be devastating in terms of infrastructure damage, economic losses, and even loss of life. In this study, we present a comprehensive evaluation of a set of deep learning architectures to realistically simulate precipitation, including heavy precipitation events (>95th percentile) and extreme events (>99th percentile) over the European domain. Moreover, we examine the optimal number of inputs based on the importance of the predictors derived from a layer-wise relevance propagation procedure. Among the architectures analyzed here, the U-Net network was found to be superior and outperformed the other networks to simulate precipitation events. Moreover, we found that a simplified version of the original U-Net with a single encoder-decoder level achieves similar skill scores as deeper versions for predicting precipitation extremes, significantly reducing overall complexity and computing resources."
6090	Evidential	"Sediment supply variations are often overlooked when interpreting depositional sequences, which tend to emphasize changes in accommodation. Here, we focus on a temporally well-constrained shallow-marine succession in the South Pyrenean Foreland Basin to test the control of sediment supply on the development of deltaic sequences during the Early Eocene. We analyzed the paleoenvironmental record (sedimentary facies and _13Corg values) of the Morillo Limestone and the Castigaleu Formation (52.2 to 50.3 Ma). During this period, a series of hyperthermal events occurred, globally recorded as negative carbon isotopic excursions (CIEs). The major progradation of the deltaic system is marked by the abrupt appearance of thick delta-front sandstones and coincides with the first recorded negative CIE. Subsequent phases of progradation/aggradation align with subsequent negative CIEs. Conversely, positive CIEs correspond to finer-grained, more distal prodelta and offshore deposits. We therefore suggest that during deposition of this Early Eocene shallow-marine succession, the primary trigger behind sequence generation was the high-frequency climate-induced variation in sediment supply, specifically the hyperthermal events, rather than changes in accommodation. This linkage underscores the complex interactions between climate dynamics and sedimentary responses, shaping the stratigraphic architecture of shallow-marine settings."
2230	Hypothetical	"The extent to which groundwater flow affects drainage density and erosion has long been debated, but is still uncertain. Here, I present a new hybrid analytical and numerical model that simulates groundwater flow, overland flow, hillslope erosion and stream incision. The model is used to explore the relation between groundwater flow and the incision and persistence of streams for a set of parameters that represent average humid climate conditions. The results show that transmissivity and groundwater flow exert a strong control on drainage density. High transmissivity results in low drainage density and high incision rates and vice versa, with drainage density varying roughly linearly with transmissivity. The model evolves by a process that is defined here as groundwater capture, whereby streams with a higher rate of incision draw the watertable below neighbouring streams, which subsequently run dry and stop incising. This process is less efficient in models with low transmissivity due to the association of low transmissivity and high watertable gradients. A comparison of different parameters shows that drainage density is the most sensitive to transmissivity, followed by parameters that govern initial slope and baselevel. The results agree with field data that show a negative correlation between transmissivity and drainage density. These results imply that permeability and transmissivity exert a strong control on drainage density, stream incision and landscape evolution. Models of landscape evolution may need to explicitly include groundwater flow."
2097	Definitive	"Methane emitted and flared from industrial sources across the United States is a major contributor to global climate change. Methanotrophic bacteria can transform this methane into useful protein-rich biomass for animal feed. In the rapidly growing aquaculture industry, this can replace ocean-caught fishmeal, reducing demands on over-harvested fisheries. Here, we analyze the economic potential of producing methanotrophic microbial protein from stranded methane produced at wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and oil and gas facilities. Our results show that current technology can enable production equivalent to 14% of the global fishmeal market at prices at or below the current cost of fishmeal of roughly $1,600 per metric ton. Achievable cost reductions, e.g. reduced cooling or labor requirements, could allow stranded methane from the US alone to displace the entire global fishmeal market."
7015	Hypothetical	"The emplacement of large igneous provinces (LIPs) is known to have been a driver of climate change in Earth‚Äôs past, particularly during the breakup of Pangaea. However, the balance between climate warming through CO2 emission and climate cooling through increased weathering is poorly understood. To better understand the role of LIP emplacement on long-term climate change, we utilize a coupled climate-biogeochemical model which considers the holistic impact of LIPs through both degassing of CO2 and enhancement of local continental weathering rates. Of the 7 LIPs during the breakup phase of Pangea (approximately between 300 and 150 Ma), only the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP) drives long-term cooling in our model, and this is a minor effect despite emplacement of a very large surface area in the humid tropics. Similarly, only the CAMP imparts a clear stepwise change in the long-term strontium isotope record whereas the other LIPs of this period do not. Due to relatively small areal extents, and emplacement often outside the tropical weathering zone, we conclude that most LIPs have no significant global cooling effect on multimillion year timescales."
2790	Hypothetical	"Flooding is one of the most frequent natural disasters, causing billions of dollars in damage and threatening vulnerable communities worldwide. Although the impact of flooding can never be diminished, minimizing future losses is possible by taking structural or non-structural mitigation actions. Mitigation applications are often costly practices. However, they can be more feasible for long-term planning and protection. On the other hand, selecting a feasible option requires a comprehensive analysis of potential risk and damages and comparing the costs and benefits of different mitigation types. This paper presents a web-based decision support framework called Mitigation and Damage Assessment System (MiDAS) that analyzes flood risk and mitigation strategies at the community and property-level scopes. The system utilizes regulatory flood inundation maps, damage functions, property information, scenario-based climate projections, and mitigation inputs and guidelines from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). We analyzed the community-level analysis of three major cities in Eastern Iowa: Cedar Falls, Cedar Rapids, and Waterloo. The framework helps users select the appropriate flood mitigation measures based on various characteristics (e.g., foundation type, occupancy, square footage) and provides cost estimates for implementing measures. The system also provides a decision tree algorithm for analyzing and representing the mitigation decision by reviewing existing guidelines (e.g., FEMA, USACE). Implementation of mitigation measures can reduce the property's vulnerability and improve the response to a flooding event."
8191	Evidential	"The latest Cretaceous(?)–Paleocene Barra Honda Formation represents one of the largest carbonate shoals (>900 km2, 350 m thick) of the convergent margin of Costa Rica. Although the mode of formation of the carbonate shoal is well understood, how environmental and tectonic factors interacted to cause its demise near the Paleocene-Eocene boundary remains poorly constrained. Stable isotopic, biostratigraphic, mineralogical, and geochronologic analyses from the Barra Honda Formation and overlying siliceous Buenavista Formation provide new constraints on the timing and causes of the demise of the carbonate shoal. We report one new U–Pb zircon chemical abrasion, isotope dilution, thermal ionization mass spectrometry date (56.30 Ma ± 0.13 Ma, 2_) obtained from an ash-rich layer at the boundary between the two formations. The sharp transition from Barra Honda massive limestones to Buenavista marl-chert alternations coincides with a negative shift in carbon isotope (_13Ccarb) values of about 3 to 5 ‰ and a 50 % decrease in carbonate contents. The timing of the combined lithological-mineralogical-isotopic change is coeval with the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, 56 Ma). The onset of clay-rich sedimentation is consistent with a PETM-related increase of terrestrial influx of nutrients and detrital particles, which promoted eutrophication and decreased light availability in the photic zone. Combined with seawater acidification and warming, these environmental parameters were fatal to carbonate-producing benthic communities of Barra Honda. High subsidence rates of the forearc basin and renewed arc volcanic activity must have closely followed the cessation of shallow carbonate production, preventing further formation of the carbonate shoal."
2161	Evidential	"Over million-year timescales, the geologic cycling of carbon controls long-term climate and the oxidation of Earth's surface. Inferences about the carbon cycle can be made from time series of carbon isotopic ratios measured from sedimentary rocks. The foundational assumption for carbon isotope chemostratigraphy is that carbon isotope values reflect dissolved inorganic carbon in a well-mixed ocean in equilibrium with the atmosphere. However, when applied to shallow-water platform environments, where most ancient carbonates preserved in the geological record formed, recent research has documented the importance of considering both local variability in surface water chemistry and diagenesis. These findings demonstrate that carbon isotope chemostratigraphy of platform carbonate rarely represent the average carbonate sink or records changes in the composition of global seawater. Understanding what causes local variability in shallow-water settings, and what this variability might reveal about global boundary conditions, are vital questions for the next generation of carbon isotope chemostratigraphers."
2832	Exploratory	"Identifying and characterising dynamical regime shifts, critical transitions or potential  tipping points in palaeoclimate time series is relevant for improving the understanding of  often highly nonlinear Earth system dynamics. Beyond linear changes in time series  properties such as mean, variance, or trend, these nonlinear regime shifts can manifest  as changes in signal predictability, regularity, complexity, or higher-order stochastic  properties such as multi-stability. In recent years, several classes of methods have been put forward to study these critical  transitions in time series data that are based on concepts from nonlinear dynamics,  complex systems science, information theory, and stochastic analysis. These include approaches such as phase space-based recurrence plots  and recurrence networks, visibility graphs, order pattern-based entropies, and stochastic  modelling. Here, we review and compare in detail several prominent methods from these fields by applying them  to the same set of marine palaeoclimate proxy records of African climate variations during the past  5~million years.  Applying these methods, we observe notable nonlinear transitions in palaeoclimate dynamics  in these marine proxy records and discuss them in the context of important climate events  and regimes such as phases of intensified Walker circulation, marine isotope stage M2,  the onset of northern hemisphere glaciation and the mid-Pleistocene transition.  We find that the studied approaches complement each other by allowing us to point out distinct aspects of dynamical regime shifts in palaeoclimate time series. We also detect significant correlations of these nonlinear regime shift indicators with variations  of Earth's orbit, suggesting the latter as potential triggers of nonlinear transitions in palaeoclimate. Overall, the presented study underlines the potentials of nonlinear time series analysis approaches to provide complementary information on dynamical regime shifts in palaeoclimate and their driving processes that cannot be revealed by linear statistics or eyeball inspection of the data alone."
5116	Evidential	"The Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary marks one of the five major mass extinctions of the Phanerozoic. How the climate system responded to a bolide impact and extensive volcanism at this time over different timescales is highly debated. Here we use the distribution of branched tetraether lipids (brGDGT) from fossil peats at two sites in Saskatchewan, Canada (paleolatitude ~55°N), to generate a high-resolution (millennial) record of mean annual air temperature (MAAT) spanning the last ~4 ka of the Cretaceous and first ~30 ka of the Paleogene. Our study shows that MAATs ranged from 16–29°C, with the highest value in the first millennia of the Paleogene/ The earliest Paleogene averaged ~25°C—maintaining or enhancing warmth from the latest Cretaceous—followed by a general cooling to ~20°C over the following ~30 ka. No abrupt post-boundary cooling (e.g., an “impact winter”) or abrupt warming are evident in our data, implying that if such phenomena occurred, their duration was relatively short-lived (i.e., sub-millennial). Further, no long-term impact- or volcanism-driven warming is evident. The range of temperature change observed is considerably greater than that derived from marine proxy records over the same time interval. Our findings therefore more properly place bounds on the magnitude and duration of temperature change on land during this critical interval—the main setting for the demise of non-avian dinosaurs and the rise of mammals."
3530	Hypothetical	"Climate change and development of data-oriented methods are appealing for new climate classification schemes. Based on the most widely used Köppen-Geiger scheme, this article proposes a neural network based climate classification method from a data science perspective. In conventional schemes, empirically handcrafted rules are used to divide climate data into climate types, resulting in certain defects. In the proposed method, a machine learning mechanism is employed to do the task. Specifically, the method first trains a convolutional neural network to fit climate data to land cover conditions, then extracts features from the trained network and finally uses a self-organizing map to cluster land pixels on the extracted features. The method is applied to cluster global land represented by 66,501 pixels (each covers 0.5 latitude degree _ 0.5 longitude degree) using 2020 land cover data and 1991-2020 climate normals, and a 4 _ 3 _ 2 hexagonal self-organizing map clusters the land pixels into twenty-four climate types. By Kappa statistics, the obtained scheme shows good agreement with the Köppen-Geiger and Köppen-Trewartha schemes. In addition, our scheme addresses some issues of the Köppen schemes, suggests new climate types such as As (severe dry-wet season) and Fw (arctic desert), and identifies the highland group H without input of elevation. The proposed method is expected as an intelligent tool to monitor changes in the global climate pattern and to discover new climate types of interest that possibly emerge in the future. It may also be valuable for bio-ecology communities."
2119	Definitive	"Changes in temperature averages, variability, and extremes may all independently affect economic growth under climate change. Kotz et al. (2021) show that temperature variability reduces growth, but find no significant effect of temperature extremes. Recreating their results, here we show that temperature extremes do indeed affect growth independently from the effects of variability. Our results emphasize the need to consider multiple related moments of the temperature distribution when analyzing climate damages and to use metrics of temperature extremes that are relative to the local climate."
4598	Definitive	"Peatlands throughout the boreal forest are expected to experience changes in precipitation, evapotranspiration and temperature due to climate change. Correspondingly, changes in hydrologic regimes could lead to increased drought and occurrence of wildfire. Fire management agencies require information about near-real time wildfire vulnerability in boreal peatlands. Remote sensing tools (e.g., NDVI, NDII) to monitor changing wildfire vulnerability focus on monitoring changes in vascular vegetation and are not necessarily applicable to moss-dominated peatlands. We use time series analysis of Sentinel-1 SAR backscatter data to compare the trends in peatlands that have burned to unburned peatlands and show that the Theil-Sen slopes of seasonally decomposed SAR backscatter reflects prolonged drought conditions that can lead to burning. Seasonally decomposed Sentinel-2 NDVI and NDII were also tested but no statistical differences were found between burned and unburned peatlands. Overall, we found that 6 months prior to a wildfire the slope of seasonally decomposed Sentinel-1 VV SAR backscatter was significantly different in burned and unburned peatlands, and can be used to spatially identify fire vulnerability and identify fire-prone areas."
2437	Exploratory	"Mapping carbon stocks in the tropics is essential for climate change mitigation. Passive microwave remote sensing allows estimating carbon from deep canopy layers through the Vegetation Optical Depth (VOD) parameter. Although their spatial resolution is coarser than that of optical vegetation indices or airborne Lidar data, microwaves present a higher penetration capacity at low frequencies (Lband) and avoid cloud masking. This work compares the relationships of airborne carbon maps in Central and South America with both (i) SMAP L-band VOD at 9 km gridding and (ii) MODIS Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI). Models to estimate carbon stocks are built from these two satellite derived variables. Results show that L-band VOD has a greater capacity to model carbon variability than EVI. The resulting VOD-derived carbon estimates are further presented at a detailed (9 km) spatial scale."
6652	Exploratory	"Although study of the effect of energy-absorbing gases in our atmosphere has a two-hundred year history and an unequivocal explanation based on scientific observation and theory, a significant fraction of the public and even a few scientists doubt the correlation between the increasing the partial pressure of atmospheric carbon dioxide (P[CO2]) and the observed increase in terrestrial temperature over the past 120 years. Although the basic science showing that CO2 would absorb the infrared radiation emitted by the earth produce a surface-warming effect was first calculated by Arrhenius in 1896, the issue was neglected by the scientific community for decades. Today there are ample climate models of the climactic effects arising from the forcing term of increasing P[CO2]. In this paper we follow Arrhenius’ concept, although we use the HITRAN database as the input to prove the connection between earth’s surface temperature and atmospheric absorption of terrestrial radiation in a direct manner that the reader can also implement. The spectra of CO2 are enormously complicated, broadened by Fermi Resonance, and intense because of the quantum coupling of the rotation of CO2 to its bending. Using an on-line database for the transitions of CO2 the reader will easily be able to show that CO2 reduces the transmittance of the Earth’s thermal radiation through the atmosphere, which in turn results in heating of the surface. The model does not make any predictions other than that the global temperature will increase as a function of P[CO2]. The result is at the intersection of Physics, Atmospheric Science, and Psychology since the demonstration is a powerful tool that will give scientists the impetus to reach out to the public with lucid explanations based on physical principles."
2489	Evidential	"The Greek peninsula is located at the crossroads of several major atmospheric circulation patterns and is consequently characterized by high variability in climatic conditions, making it an important location to examine past climate variability. Over the last decades, the focus of many studies in the region has been to unravel Holocene paleoclimatic oscillations and their impact on the development of ancient civilizations using terrestrial archives and especially speleothem records. In this study we contribute to the regional climate record over the Quaternary using a speleothem from the Hermes Cave located at the southern flanks of the Corinth Rift in central Greece. Our stalagmite grew over two distinct periods, from ~127 to 105 ka and from 18 to 8 ka B.P. separated by a distinct hiatus. We have examined its growth history, stable isotope geochemistry and elemental composition. Higher growth rates are observed during the Eemian and the early Holocene and are attributed to high water recharge implying humid conditions. A gradual isotopic enrichment before the growth hiatus of the stalagmite suggests a gradual drying that can be related to glacier advance. Our record correlates with other paleoclimate records from the broader area confirming and extending a pattern of coherent changes in paleoclimate across the Eastern Mediterranean basin."
1656	Evidential	"A lack of liquid water limits life on glaciers worldwide but specialized microbes still colonize these environments. These microbes reduce surface albedo, which, in turn, could lead to warming and enhanced glacier melt. Here we present results from a replicated, controlled field experiment to quantify the impact of microbes on snowmelt in red-snow communities. Addition of nitrogen‚Äìphosphorous‚Äìpotassium fertilizer increased alga cell counts nearly fourfold, to levels similar to nitrogen‚Äìphosphorus-enriched lakes; water alone increased counts by half. The manipulated alga abundance explained a third of the observed variability in snowmelt. Using a normalized-difference spectral index we estimated alga abundance from satellite imagery and calculated microbial contribution to snowmelt on an icefield of 1,900 km2. The red-snow area extended over about 700 km2, and in this area we determined that microbial communities were responsible for 17% of the total snowmelt there. Our results support hypotheses that snow-dwelling microbes increase glacier melt directly in a bio-geophysical feedback by lowering albedo and indirectly by exposing low-albedo glacier ice. Radiative forcing due to perennial populations of microbes may match that of non-living particulates at high latitudes. Their contribution to climate warming is likely to grow with increased melt and nutrient input."
2913	Exploratory	"Adaptive management has become the preferred approach for managing environmental flows globally, and successful implementation recognizes multiple dimensions of variability and complexity in socio-ecological systems.  This paper outlines an environmental flow assessment methodology that explicitly addresses the uncertainty and change inherent in adaptively managing multiple values for management of environmental flows. While non-stationarity and uncertainty are well recognised in the climate literature, these have not been addressed within the structure of environmental flows methodologies. Here, we present an environmental flow assessment that is structured to explicitly consider future change and uncertainty in climate and socio-ecological values, by examining scenarios using ecological models. The environmental flow assessment methodology further supports adaptive management through the intentional integration of participatory approaches and the inclusion of diverse stakeholders. We present a case study to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, highlighting how this methodology facilitates adaptive management. Rethinking our approach to environmental flows assessments is an important step in ensuring that environmental flows continue to work effectively as a management tool under climate change."
6754	Evidential	"Understanding past sea-level variations is essential to constrain future patterns of sea-level rise in response to warmer climate conditions. Due to good preservation and the possibility to use various geochemical methods to date fossil sea-level index points, the Last Interglacial (Marine Isotope Stage, MIS, 5e, 130-116 ka) is often regarded as one of the best climate analogs for a future warmer climate. MIS 5e coastal stratigraphic sequences, such as fossil coral reefs in tectonically stable areas, are characterized by abrupt shifts in their geological facies, steps within the reef topography or backstepped fossil reefs, which have been often interpreted as proxies for abrupt sea-level fluctuations within the interglacial. However, the observational evidence and magnitude of such abrupt changes are controversial. Here, we run nearly 50 thousand simulations of a 2D kinematic reef model that can reproduce coral reef growth and demise through time. Our aim is to investigate the parameters of space, the sea-level scenarios, and the processes which multiple-stepped MIS 5e fossil reefs form. As inputs to the model, we use both published and synthetic sea-level histories (17 sea-level curves ranging from one to several sea-level peaks), and a wide range of reef growth rates, marine erosion rates and bedrock foundation slopes. Our results show that the only sea-level history that could explain the generation of an emerged MIS 5e backstepped reef is a first sea-level peak followed by an abrupt rise in sea level and a second short-term peak. Any other multiple-stepped stratigraphy can be explained by the interplay between reef growth, marine erosion, and bedrock slope."
1909	Hypothetical	"In the UK, coastal flooding and erosion are two of the primary climate-related hazards to communities, businesses, and infrastructure. To better address the ramifications of those hazards, now and into the future, the UK needs to transform its scattered, fragmented coastal data resources into a systematic, integrated, quality-controlled, openly accessible data portal. Such a portal would support analyses of coastal risk and resilience by hosting, in addition to data layers for coastal flooding and erosion, a diverse array of spatial datasets for building footprints, infrastructure networks, land use, population, and various socio-economic measures and indicators derived from survey and census data. Rather than prescribe user engagement, the portal would facilitate novel combinations of spatial data layers in order to yield scientifically, societally, and economically beneficial insights into UK coastal systems."
2876	Hypothetical	"Bias adjustment of numerical climate model simulations involves several technical and epistemological arguments wherein the notion of physical inconsistency is often referred to, either for rejecting the legitimacy of bias adjustment in general or for justifying the necessity of sophisticated multivariate techniques. However, this notion is often mishandled, in part because the literature generally proceeds without defining it. In this context, the central objective of this study is to clarify and illustrate the distinction between physical inconsistency and multivariate bias, by investigating the effect of bias adjustment on two different kinds of inter-variable relationships, namely a physical constraint expected to hold at every step of a time series and statistical properties that emerge with potential bias over a climatic time scale. The study involves the application of 18 alternative bias adjustment techniques on 10 climate simulations and over 12 sites across North America. Adjusted variables are temperature, pressure, relative humidity and specific humidity, linked by a thermodynamic constraint. The analysis suggests on the one hand that a clear instance of potential physical inconsistency can be avoided with either a univariate or a multivariate technique, if and only if the bias adjustment strategy explicitly considers the physical constraint to be preserved. On the other hand, it also suggests that sophisticated multivariate techniques alone aren‚Äôt complete adjustment strategies in presence of a physical constraint, as they cannot replace its explicit consideration. As a supplementary objective, this study relates common optional adjustment procedures with likely effects on diverse basic statistical properties, as an effort to guide climate information users in the determination of adequate bias adjustment strategies for their research purposes."
5657	Evidential	"Global warming increases health risks from heat exposure. Historical evidence suggests disproportionate impacts of heat exposure in different regions across socioeconomic groups in the US. However, little is known about the scale of potential disparities and which populations stand to be most vulnerable under different future climate scenarios. Here, we assess county-level heat exposure, measured by Heat Index (HI) from now to 2100, in the contiguous US using an ensemble of Integrated Assessment Models results that present five future warming and socioeconomic development pathways. Our results reveal stark spatial and sociodemographic disparities in present and future heat stress, mainly for people of color and those aged 65 and older. The large proportion of high-risk populations residing in the Southern US makes this region particularly vulnerable to increases in HI, future climate warming will further enlarge disparities between presently-disadvantaged sociodemographic groups. Our findings underscore the need for considering sociodemographic factors when developing climate adaptation plans and prioritizing policy responses for vulnerable communities."
2740	Definitive	"Wildfires threaten human lives, destroy infrastructure, disrupt economic activity, and damage ecosystem services. A record-breaking gigafire event ravaged the western United States (USA) in mid-September 2020, burning 1.2 million acres (4,900 km2) in Oregon and California, and resulting in severe smoke pollution with daily fine particulate matter (PM2.5) concentrations over 300 ¬µg/m3 for multiple days in many cities. Although previous studies have shown that regional warming escalates wildfire in the western USA, such an unprecedented fire cannot be explained by climate variability alone. Here we show that the synoptic-scale feedback between the wildfires and weather played an unexpectedly important role in accelerating the spread of this fire and also trapped pollutants in the shallow boundary layer over valley cities. Specifically, we find that aerosol-radiation interaction of the smoke plumes over the Cascade Mountains enhanced the downslope winds and weakened the moisture transport, thereby forming a positive feedback loop that amplified the fires and contributed to ~54% of estimated air-pollution related deaths. Our study underscores the complexity of the Earth system and the importance of understanding fundamental mechanisms to effectively mitigate disaster risks in a changing climate."
2478	Evidential	"Global climate features are known to influence tornado frequency in the U.S., but more work needs to focus on understanding the extent to which climate variables contribute to increases in CAPE and shear on days with an outbreak of at least ten tornadoes. Here the authors quantify the conditional relationships between precursor SST and SLP variables and localized extremes of CAPE and shear associated with large outbreaks. They do this by fitting linear regressions to global climate variables averaged over the fifteen days before the outbreak to estimate the changes in CAPE and shear on days with at least ten tornadoes. Results show that for every 1¬∞ increase in the SST gradient between the Gulf of Alaska and the Caribbean, DLBS increases by 0.88 m s¬Ø¬π, SLBS increases by 0.62 m s¬Ø¬π, and CAPE decreases by 50.6 J kg¬Ø¬π, conditional on at least ten tornadoes, and holding the other variables constant. Further, results show that for every 1¬∞ E increase in longitude, DLBS increases by 0.15 m s¬Ø¬π, SLBS increases by 0.38 m s¬Ø¬π, and CAPE decreases by 39.3 J kg¬Ø¬π, conditional on at least ten tornadoes, and holding the other variables constant. Additionally, SLBS is the only environmental factor that has a significant upward annual trend."
2242	Hypothetical	"There are nearly 300 barrier islands between Maine and Texas, and of these, at least 70 are intensively developed. Mean population density along the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf coasts are the highest in the country. Such concentrated development exists and continues despite the fact that barrier islands are transient landscapes, not only over geologic time scales of millennia but also within human and economic time scales of centuries to decades. Populated barrier islands are inherently vulnerable to natural hazards such as sea-level rise, cumulative erosion, and storm events; this vulnerability drives humans to actively modify barrier geometry and environments. The most common manipulations are beach nourishment, to mitigate shoreline erosion, and increases to dune height or seawall construction to prevent flooding and damage from overwash during storm events. Over time scales of years to decades, hazard-mitigation actions impact natural, spatio-temporal barrier processes such as washover deposition and planform transgression, which in turn affect future efforts to manage, control, or prevent barrier change. Through their maintenance and persistence, interventions against coastal hazards represent a significant dynamical component of developed barrier-island system evolution, such that, within the past century, human actions and natural barrier-island processes have become dynamically coupled. This coupling leads to steady-state barrier island behaviors that are fundamentally new. The only way to understand how developed barrier islands will respond to climate change over decadal time scales is to treat these settings as strongly coupled human‚Äìnatural systems. Over time scales longer than centuries, human interventions may be coupled only weakly to long-term barrier dynamics. Short of major technological advancements or sweeping decisions to transform these environments into comprehensively geoengineered terrains, high-density development on U.S. barrier islands will likely cease to exist in its current configuration."
8563	Evidential	"Commensuration of the radiative effects of different greenhouse gases (GHGs) is crucial for understanding the effects of land cover and ecosystem changes on the global climate. However, none of the current commensuration approaches are suitable for addressing the current climatic effect of mire ecosystems as compared to the situation in which such mires would not exist. The mire ecosystems have accumulated carbon for millennia, creating a negative perturbation to the atmospheric carbon dioxide content, but at the same time they emit methane into the atmosphere. Thus, the functioning of mires involves GHG fluxes with opposing effects on Earth’s radiative balance. Here, based on a simple radiative forcing (RF) model, we propose a new metric for commensuration of the effects of accumulated carbon and methane emission (ACME) on Earth’s energy balance. This ACME approach is applicable to natural mires with a significant part of their carbon accumulated more than 1000 years ago and requires relatively few input data. We demonstrate the feasibility of the ACME approach by applying it to a set of northern mires. The ACME-based RF estimate indicates that these mires have a cooling effect on the current climate, contrary to what a global warming potential-based calculation suggests, since the climatic effect is dominated by the sustained carbon accumulation. By applying the new metric with varying estimates of the total carbon storage and methane emission of northern mires, we estimate the current RF of these mires to range from –0.45 to –0.23 W m-2."
3283	Evidential	"We construct an 800 kyr synthetic record of Greenland climate variability based on the thermal bipolar seesaw model. Our Greenland analogue reproduces much of the variability seen in the Greenland ice cores over the last 100 kyr. We also find a strong similarity with the absolutely-dated speleothem record from China, allowing us to place ice core records within an absolute timeframe for the last 400 kyr. The synthetic record provides both a stratigraphic reference and a conceptual basis for assessing the long-term evolution of millennial-scale variability, and its potential role in longer timescale climate change. Indeed, we provide evidence for a ubiquitous association between bipolar seesaw oscillations and glacial terminations throughout the Middle to Late Pleistocene."
7029	Definitive	"More than half the world‚Äôs lithium resources are found in brine aquifers in Chile, Argentina, and Bolivia. Lithium brine processing requires freshwater, so as lithium exploration increases, accurate estimates of freshwater availability are critical for water management decisions in this region with limited water resources. Here we calculate modern freshwater inflows, such as groundwater recharge and streamflow, for 28 active or prospective lithium-producing basins. We use regional water budget assessments, field streamflow measurements, and global climate and groundwater recharge datasets. Using the freshwater inflow estimates, we calculate water scarcity using the Available Water Remaining methodology. Among all 28 basins, freshwater inflows range from 2 to 33‚Äâmm per year. Our results reveal that commonly used global hydrologic models overestimate streamflow and freshwater availability substantially, leading to inaccurate water scarcity classifications."
8407	Exploratory	"This review explores how philanthropy contributes to climate action in Atlantic Canada, a region facing threats from extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and scarcity of resources that impact local communities. While public and private sector funding is vital, philanthropy offers unique opportunities to support localized, innovative climate solutions. This review explores the current climate finance landscape, identifies the specific needs of Atlantic Canadian communities, and evaluates how philanthropic funding can bridge gaps in financing. It focuses on the impact of philanthropy on climate adaptation and mitigation efforts, emphasizing community resilience and sustainability. While philanthropy can drive positive change, challenges such as equitable resource distribution, fostering systemic change, and empowering marginalized communities must be addressed. Philanthropic organizations should transition from providing short-term, project-focused funding to supporting long-term, transformative initiatives. Collaborative partnerships between governments, businesses, and civil society are key to maximizing impact. Addressing these challenges and embracing innovative approaches will enable philanthropy to serve as a powerful catalyst for climate action, fostering a more environmentally stable future and able to withstand climate challenges for Atlantic Canada and beyond."
3554	Hypothetical	"Black carbon (BC) plays an important role in the climate system due to its strong warming effect, yet the magnitude of this effect is highly uncertain due to the complex mixing state of aerosols. Here we build a unified theoretical framework to describe BC’s mixing states, linking dynamic processes to BC coating thickness distribution, and show its self-similarity for sites in diverse environments. The size distribution of BC-containing particles is found to follow an exponential pattern and is independent of BC core size. A mixing state module is established based on this finding and successfully applied in global and regional models, which increases the accuracy of aerosol climate effect estimations. Our theoretical framework can bridge the gap between observation and model simulation in both mixing state description and light absorption quantification."
1575	Definitive	"The benefits of pastoralism for marginal, arid environments are often not appreciated. One notable past example of the human response to encroaching desertification comes from the regional climate deterioration after the most recent African Humid Period, which ended around 5,500 years ago. Recent evidence points to a population expansion in northern Africa prior to this, associated with the introduction of  pastoralism. Here we consider the role, if any, of this population on the subsequent ecological collapse. Using a climate-vegetation model driven by global forcings, we estimate the natural length of the most recent African Humid Period (AHP). The model indicates that the system was most susceptible to collapse between 7-6 ka, which is at least 500 years before the observed collapse. Together with archaeological and ethnographic evidence from northern Africa, this suggests that the inclusion of increasing elements of pastoralism after 7 ka was an effective adaptation to the regional environmental changes. Pastoralism also appears to have slowed the deterioration caused by orbitally-driven climate change. This supports the view that modern pastoralism is not only sustainable, but beneficial for the management of the world’s dryland environments."
2907	Hypothetical	"Recent advances in citizen weather station (CWS) networks, with data accessible via crowd-sourcing, provide relevant climatic information to urban scientists and decision makers. In particular, CWS can provide long-term measurements of urban heat and valuable information on spatio-temporal heterogeneity related to horizontal heat advection. In this study, we make the first compilation of a quasi-climatologic dataset covering 6 years (2015–2020) of hourly near-surface air temperature measurements obtained via 1560 suitable CWS in a domain covering south-east England and Greater London. We investigated the spatio- temporal distribution of urban heat and the influences of local environments on climate, captured by CWS through the scope of Local Climate Zones (LCZ) – a land-use land-cover classification specifically designed for urban climate studies. We further calculate, for the first time, the amount of advected heat captured by CWS located in Greater London and the wider south east England region. We find that London is on average warmer by _1.0 _C to _2.0 _C than the rest of south-east England. Characteristics of the southern coastal climate are also captured in the analysis. We find that on average, urban heat advection (UHA) contributes to 0.22 _C of the total urban heat in Greater London. Certain areas, mostly in the centre of London are deprived of urban heat through advection since heat is transferred more to downwind suburban areas. UHA can positively contribute to urban heat by up to _2.0 _C on average and negatively by down to _-1.0 _C. Our results also show an important degree of inter- and intra-LCZ variability in UHA, calling for more research in the future. Nevertheless, we already find that UHA can impact green areas and reduce their cooling benefit. Such outcomes show the added value of CWS for future urban design."
2100	Definitive	"Heat-related mortality and flooding are pressing challenges for the >4 billion urban population worldwide, exacerbated by increasing urbanization and climate change. Urban greening, such as green roofs and parks, can potentially help address both problems, but the geographical variation of the relative hydrological and thermal performance benefits of such interventions are unknown. Here we quantify globally how climate driven trade-offs exist between modelled hydrological retention and cooling potential of urban greening. Water retention generally increases with aridity in water limited environments, while cooling potential favors lower aridity, energy limited, climates. Urban greening cannot yield high performance simultaneously for addressing both urban heat-island and urban flooding problems in most cities globally. However, in more arid locations, where sustainable, irrigation might be used to improve potential cooling benefits while maintaining retention performance. We demonstrate that as precipitation becomes increasingly variable with climate change, the hydrological and thermal performance of thinner substrates would both diminish more quickly compared to thicker and more deeply vegetated systems, presenting challenges for urban greening strategies. Our results provide a conceptual framework and geographically targeted quantitative guide for urban development, renewal and policymaking."
6995	Evidential	"Climate change poses a significant threat to coastal communities, particularly those reliant on coastal infrastructure. Rising sea levels and increasingly severe weather events endanger coastlines across Canada, a nation with over 243,000 km of coastline. Indigenous communities, with their long history of coastal resource utilization, are especially vulnerable. This study investigates the social, economic, and environmental impacts of coastal erosion and flooding in Channel-Port aux Basques, Newfoundland. Hurricane Fiona’s devastating impact on the community in 2022 underscores the urgency of adaptation strategies. The research employed a multi-pronged approach: data analysis from weather and census sources, a literature review, a vulnerability assessment using established frameworks, and agent-based modeling using NetLogo software. Findings reveal significant social impacts, including displacement, emotional distress, and loss of public spaces. While existing adaptation measures like shoreline armoring offer some protection, their effectiveness in the face of stronger storms and projected sea level rise remains questionable. The agent-based model predicts increased coastal erosion, with households within 8 meters experiencing erosion within the first year at current sea level rise rates. The study recommends developing a comprehensive plan to mitigate coastal erosion risks. Potential solutions include sea walls and promoting sustainable land-use practices that prioritize coastal ecosystems and managed retreat strategies. The research concludes by emphasizing the need for context-specific, participatory adaptation strategies to enhance coastal community resilience in the face of a changing climate."
2665	Evidential	"The midlatitude poleward atmospheric energy transport increases in radiatively forced simulations of warmed climates across a range of models from comprehensive coupled general circulation models (GCMs) to idealized aquaplanet moist GCMs to diffusive moist energy balance models. These increases have been rationalized from two perspectives. The energetic (or radiative) perspective takes the atmospheric energy budget and decomposes energy flux changes (radiative forcing, feedbacks, or surface fluxes) to determine the energy transport changes required by the budget. The diffusive perspective takes the net effect of atmospheric macroturbulence to be a diffusive energy transport down-gradient, so transport changes can arise from changes in mean energy gradients or turbulent diffusivity. Here, we compare these perspectives in idealized moist, gray-radiation GCM simulations over a wide range of climates. The energetic perspective has a dominant role for radiative forcing in this GCM, with cancellation between the temperature feedback components that account for the GCM's non-monotonic energy transport changes in response to warming. Comprehensive CMIP5 simulations have similarities in the northern hemisphere to the idealized GCM, though a comprehensive GCM over several CO2 doublings has a distinctly different feedback evolution structure. The diffusive perspective requires a non-constant diffusivity to account for the idealized GCM-simulated changes, with important roles for  the eddy velocity, dry static stability, and horizontal energy gradients. Beyond diagnostic analysis, GCM-independent a priori theories for components of the temperature feedback are presented that account for changes without knowledge of a perturbed climate state, suggesting that the energetic perspective is the more parsimonious one."
1744	Definitive	"Earth’s climate and water cycle are highly dependent on the latent heat flux (LE) associated with terrestrial evapotranspiration. While the widely-used Penman-Monteith LE model is useful to explore vegetative controls on LE, land-atmosphere interactions are difficult to interpret due to the complex role of biological controls on underlying physical processes. Here, we present a novel LE model that defines LE as a combination of diabatic (heat-driven) and adiabatic (relative humidity (rh) gradient-driven) processes using only abiotic variables. This approach yields new insights on the fundamental characteristics of LE. Here we show that the ratio of LE to available energy is mainly controlled by vertical rh gradients, but the spatiotemporal variability in rh gradients are small due to equilibration at the land-atmosphere boundary. Consequently, the global mean vertical rh gradient is near zero, implying land-atmosphere equilibrium at the global-scale. As a result, the spatiotemporal variability of LE is largely determined by the diabatic term, which can be readily determined by standard meteorological measurements. Our proposed model and findings provide a fundamental benchmark for LE predictions. By demonstrating how land surface conditions become encoded in the atmospheric state, our model will also help to improve our understanding of Earth’s climate system and water cycle."
8636	Definitive	"Carbon markets are thought to be central to global climate strategies,1 but their scalability depends on the credibility of emissions reduction claims,2 a point that has recently faced scientific and public doubt.3,4  Carbon projects typically generate their own estimates of averted emissions to produce credits, a practice that introduces potential conflicts of interest and underscores the need for rigorous oversight. Focusing on cleaner cookstoves, we explore the difficulties in using academic studies as benchmarks for evaluations of carbon projects and highlight how methodological choices shape both evaluations and conclusions. Reexamining one influential study on cookstove carbon project overcrediting5, we show that under alternative assumptions consistent with the state of the science estimated overcrediting falls by half. While the overall sector still exhibits worrisome overcrediting, one-fifth of projects analyzed show no clear evidence of it. Enhanced collaboration between researchers and project developers, we argue, is essential for improving the accuracy of carbon market assessments and ensuring that these initiatives deliver genuine social and environmental benefits."
2873	Definitive	"The EU Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) has produced an operational climate service, called C3S Energy, designed to enable the energy industry and policymakers to assess the impacts of climate variability and climate change on the energy sector in Europe. The C3S Energy service covers different time horizons, for the past 40_years and the future. It provides time series of electricity demand and supply from wind, solar photovoltaic and hydropower, and can be used for recent trends analysis, seasonal outlooks or the assessment of climate change impacts on energy mixes in the long term. This article introduces this service and the resulting dataset, with a focus on the design and validation of the energy conversion models, based on ENTSO-E energy data and the ERA5 climate reanalysis. Flexibility and coherence across all countries have been preferred upon models' accuracy. However, the comparison with ENTSO-E data shows that the models provide plausible energy indicators and, in particular, allow comparing climate variability effects on power demand and generation in a harmonized manner all over Europe."
1413	Hypothetical	"The importance of subtropical and extratropical zonal wind stress on Pacific Subtropical Cells (STCs) strength is assessed through several idealized numerical experiments performed with a global ocean model. Different zonal wind stress anomalies are employed, and their intensity is strengthened or weakened with respect to the climatological value throughout a suite of simulations.   Strengthened (weakened) zonal wind stress anomalies result in increased (decreased) STCs meridional mass and energy transport. Upwelling of subsurface water into the tropics is intensified (reduced), a distinct cold (warm) anomaly appears in the equatorial thermocline and up to the surface, resulting in significant tropical sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies.   Results hold for both subtropical and extratropical anomalies, suggesting the potential impact of mid-latitude atmospheric modes of variability on tropical climate.  Finally, the remotely-driven response is compared with a set of locally-forced simulations, where an equatorial zonal wind stress anomaly is imposed. A dynamically distinct response is achieved, whereby the equatorial thermocline adjusts to the wind stress anomaly resulting in significant equatorial SST anomalies as in the remotely-forced simulations. Significant anomalies in the Indonesian throughflow are generated only when equatorial wind stress anomalies are applied, leading to remarkable heat content anomalies in the Indian Ocean.  Equatorial wind stress anomalies experiments do not involve modifications of STC transports, but could set up the appropriate initial conditions for a tropical-extratropical teleconnection, involving both Hadley cells and STC anomalous transports."
6244	Definitive	"Although the 2015 Paris Agreement climate targets seem certain to be missed, only a few experts are questioning the adequacy of the current approach to limiting climate change and suggesting that additional approaches are needed to avoid unacceptable catastrophes. This article posits that selective science communication and unrealistically optimistic assumptions are obscuring the reality that greenhouse gas emissions reduction and carbon dioxide removal will not curtail climate change in the 21st Century. It also explains how overly pessimistic and speculative criticisms are behind opposition to considering potential climate cooling interventions as a complementary approach for mitigating dangerous warming.  There is little evidence supporting assertions that: current greenhouse gas emissions reduction and removal methods can and will be ramped up in time to prevent dangerous climate change; overshoot of Paris Agreement targets will be temporary; net zero emissions will produce a safe, stable climate; the impacts of overshoot can be managed and reversed; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change models and assessments capture the full scope of prospective disastrous impacts; and the risks of climate interventions are greater than the risks of inaction.  These largely unsupported presumptions distort risk assessments and discount the urgent need to develop a viable mitigation strategy. Due to political pressures, many critical scientific concerns are ignored or preemptively dismissed in international negotiations. As a result, the present and growing crisis and the level of effort and time that will be required to control and rebalance the climate are severely underestimated.  In conclusion, the paper outlines the key elements of a realistic policy approach that would augment current efforts to constrain dangerous warming by supplementing current mitigation approaches with climate cooling interventions."
5345	Evidential	"Mexico encompasses a large spectrum of landscapes with topographic, geographic, and climatic factors interacting in a complex ecohydrological setting. For decades, isotope hydrogeological tools have been applied in Mexico using short-term or seasonal local meteoric water lines as valid input functions. Yet, a systematic evaluation of meteoric isotope characteristics is still lacking. Here we report on the spatial and temporal isotope variations of 21 precipitation monitoring stations across Mexico. Our database includes 608 monthly samples collected from 2018 to 2021 over four regions (between 5 and 2,365 m asl): the Pacific coast, the Gulf of Mexico/Caribbean Sea region, and the Central and Northern Plateaus. Precipitation _18O seasonality from the dry (winter) to the wet season (summer) was characterized by a notable W-shaped variability. Monthly precipitation amounts and _18O compositions exhibited poor to strong linear regressions (Adj. r2_0.01 to 0.75), with inverse (positive) relationships over the northern monsoon-affected region. Low d-excess (5.1 to 9.7‰) corresponded with greater terrestrial moisture contributions (20.5%) over the arid northern regions. Moisture inputs from the Gulf of Mexico/Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean were associated with near-equilibrium or greater d-excess values (8.8 to 14.3‰), respectively. The best-fit linear models for _18O (Adj. r2=0.85) and _2H (Adj. r2=0.88) were determined on topographic and geographical predictors, resulting in an updated high-resolution precipitation isoscape (100 m2 grid) for Mexico. Orographic barriers (-2.10‰ in _18O/km) coupled with the interaction of tropical cyclones and cold fronts, the evolution of the North American Monsoon system, and the passage of easterly trade winds play a remarkable role in controlling the spatial isotope rainfall variability. Our findings provide a robust baseline for ecohydrological, climatic, forensic, archeological, and paleoclimate studies in North America."
5154	Hypothetical	"Over the last decade, Nature-based Solutions (NbS) for water management have gained traction as triple-win options for climate action due to their ability to address social, economic, and environmental challenges. Recent developments in the literature of NbS have resulted in a body of work addressing questions about knowledge and justice. In line with these developments, this paper proposes the Knowledge and Epistemic Injustice for NbS for Water Framework (KEIN Framework) to identify the production of epistemic injustices in the design of NbS for water management. The KEIN framework draws on questions about knowledge and power raised by Avelino (2021) and five mechanisms that lead to epistemic injustice based on the work by Fricker (2007) and Byskov (2021). We apply the framework to examine a proposal presented to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) that included NbS for water management and Indigenous Peoples in South America. Rather than being an analysis of the project or the GCF per se, the goal of this analysis is to demonstrate the utility of the framework to analyze proposals during the design stage. We argue that proposals submitted to the GCF are reflective of a broadly held international environmental logic. We also identified indications that knowledge was organized and treated in a way that favored external actors at the expense of local actors.  Our analysis also revealed prejudices against people’s epistemic capacities, with potential implications for how the generation of local knowledge is adopted on the ground. The framework illustrates how the design of NbS may minimally disrupt power relations due to the influential role that some actors have in generating knowledge. This study contributes to the operationalization of epistemic justice in designing NbS. Through the application of the proposed framework, the study contributes to future work advancing the construction of epistemically just NbS."
6748	Hypothetical	"There is increasing awareness of the effects of climate change on mental health, but more work on understanding risk and protective factors is needed. The 2021 California Health Interview Survey included new questions about exposure to extreme weather events and mental health responses. This study aims to identify how individual factors and neighborhood social cohesion are associated with negative mental health effects of exposure to extreme weather events. In this cross-sectional, representative study, we used data from the 2021 California Health Interview Survey to analyze the association between respondent characteristics and negative mental health effects following exposure to extreme weather events. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression models were used, adjusting for individual-level sociodemographics and measures of neighborhood social cohesion. We found that 53% of the sample was affected by climate events (n = 12,955), and of these, 22.8% (n = 2,955) reported a negative impact on their mental health. Respondents who were younger, White, female, college-educated, or living in a rural area were more likely to report adverse mental health effects of climate events for themselves or household members. Individuals who had experienced property damage were much more likely to report negative mental health effects due to climate events [property damage adjusted OR 3.73, 95% CI 2.82-3.76]. This study identifies subgroups that may have higher vulnerability to the mental health effects of climate change events. Future research is needed to develop targeted prevention and outreach interventions these subgroups to build individual- and community-level resilience."
8257	Exploratory	"Geoscientists need to recognize and embrace our role as storytellers, so that we can more effectively use storytelling to advance our science. As narrative-driven storylines become an increasing tool in disaster and climate risk communications, understanding the ‘science’ of stories and storytelling becomes an ever more critical geoscientific skillset."
2783	Evidential	"In climate model configurations, standard approaches to the representation of unresolved, or subgrid scales, via deterministic closure schemes are being challenged by stochastic approaches inspired by statistical dynamical theory.  Despite gaining popularity, studies of various stochastic subgrid scale parameterizations applied to atmospheric climate and weather prediction systems have revealed a diversity of model responses, including degeneracy in the response to different forcings and compensating model errors, with little reduction in artificial damping of the small scales required for numerical stability. Due to the greater range of spatio-temporal scales involved, how to best sample subgrid fluctuations in a computationally inexpensive manner, with the aim of reduced model error and improvements to the simulated climatological state of the ocean, remains an open question. While previous studies have considered perturbations to the surface forcing or subsurface temperature tendencies, we implement an energetically consistent, simple, stochastic subgrid eddy parameterization of the momentum fluxes in regions of the three-dimensional ocean typically associated with high eddy variability.  We consider the changes in the modelled energetics of low-resolution simulations in response to stochastically forced velocity tendencies whose perturbation statistics and amplitudes are calculated from an eddy resolving ocean configuration. Kinetic energy spectra from a triple-decomposition reveal a systematic redistribution from the seasonal (climatological minus mean) potential energy to preferentially generate small scale transient kinetic energy while the total energy spectra remains largely unchanged. We show that stochastic parameterization generally improves model biases, noticeably so for the simulated energetics of the Southern Oceans."
3035	Evidential	"Improved high-resolution paleo records of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations and reconstructions of Earth’s surface temperature are available. We analyze one authoritative Pleistocene data set to explore how the climate sensitivity parameter S varies under different system states, using linear regression of mean annual surface temperature changes against CO2 forcing changes.  On the whole data set, S = 2.04K/Wm^(-2) and CO2 forcing explains 64% of the variance in temperature.  Partitioning the data by path (glaciation / de-glaciation); during de-glaciation episodes, S = 2.34K/Wm^(-2), explaining 75% of the temperature variance; during glaciations, S = 1.59K/Wm^(-2) explaining 48% of the temperature variance. Further partitioning into epochs before and after the Marine Isotope Stage 11 424 kaBP (thousand years before present); for de-glaciation paths after 424 kaBP, S = 2.63 K/Wm^(-2) explaining 83% of the variance.  Partitioning into levels of CO2 concentration has much less explanatory power; 20% for concentrations above 210 ppmv and 2% for concentrations below 210 ppmv. These partitions conflate glaciation and de-glaciation episodes and pre/post 424 kaBP epochs.  Possible process-related explanations for the path-related differences are conjectured.  The common assumption that changes in temperature are proportional to changes in CO2 forcing constrains the regression intercept to pass through the origin and inflates the regression error to the extent that the regression model becomes a worse predictor of temperature changes than simply predicting the population mean for all values of CO2 forcing. The consequences of this assumption are substantive in the context of estimating future temperature trajectories and should be carefully weighed."
5643	Definitive	"In Bangladesh’s south-central coastal zone, there is considerable potential to intensify crop production by growing dry winter season ‘Boro’ rice, maize, wheat, pulses and oilseeds using irrigation from southward flowing and predominantly freshwater rivers. However, the impacts of surface water withdrawal for irrigation and its safe operating space remain unclear. We used field measurements and simulation modeling to investigate the effects of irrigation water withdrawal for Boro rice – the most water-consumptive crop that can be grown by farmers – on river water flow and salinity under different climate change and river flow scenarios. Under the baseline conditions of 2015, about 250,000 ha could potentially be irrigated with river water that has salinity levels below 2 dS/m. The impact on river water salinity would be minimal, and only between 0.71 to 1.12% of the cropland would shift from the 0-2 dS/m class to higher salinity levels. Similarly, a minor change in water flow and salinity was simulated for the moderate climate change scenario (RCP 4.5) that forecasts a sea level rise of 22 cm in 2050. Only under the extreme climate change scenario (RCP 8.5), resulting in a sea level rise of 43 cm by 2050, and low flow conditions that are exceeded in 90 percent of the cases, the 2 dS/m isohaline would move landward by 64 to 105 km in March and April for the Tentulia and Buriswar Rivers. This would expose an additional 36.6% of potentially irrigable cropland to salinity levels of 2 to 4 dS/m.  However, Boro rice is already well established by that time and can tolerate greater levels. We conclude that there is considerable scope to expand irrigated crop production without negatively exposing the cropland and rivers to detrimental salinization levels while preserving the ecosystem services of the rivers."
2752	Hypothetical	"The impacts of volcanic eruptions on climate are increasingly well understood, but the mirror question of how climate changes affect volcanic systems and processes, which we term ‚Äúclimate-volcano impacts‚Äù, remains understudied. Accelerating research on this topic is critical in view of rapid climate change driven by anthropogenic activities. Over the last two decades, we have improved our understanding of how mass distribution on the Earth‚Äôs surface, in particular changes in ice and water distribution linked to glacial cycles, affects mantle melting, crustal magmatic processing and eruption rates. New hypotheses on the impacts of climate change on eruption processes have also emerged, including how eruption style and volcanic plume rise are affected by changing surface and atmospheric conditions, and how volcanic sulfate aerosol lifecycle, radiative forcing and climate impacts are modulated by background climate conditions. Future improvements in past climate reconstructions and current climate observations, volcanic eruption records and volcano monitoring, and numerical models will contribute to boost research on climate-volcano impacts. Important mechanisms remain to be explored, such as how changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation will affect the volcanic ash lifecycle. Fostering a holistic and interdisciplinary approach to climate-volcano impacts is critical to gain a full picture of how ongoing climate changes may affect the environmental and societal impacts of volcanic activity."
4717	Definitive	"Climate change and reduction in nutrient loads have significant effects on primary production and phytoplankton growth dynamics. Since in the last few decades in many regions, nutrients in lakes were reduced simultaneously as the climate changed. Yet, it remains unclear which of the two has impacted primary production the most. In this study, we couple the General Ocean Turbulence Model with the Ecological Regional Ocean Model to disentangle the effects of climate change and reoligotrophication on primary production (PP) in Lake Geneva, Switzerland-France. We apply a data assimilation method to calibrate the model with the observations from the past (1981-1990) and validate it against the in-situ data from the present decade (2011-2019). Both decades represent different climate conditions and trophic states of the lake. We show that the model is skilful to reproduce assimilated and unassimilated observations from both periods. According to our results, the effect of reoligotrophication on PP is marginally higher than that of warming, leading to a net decrease in primary production by 10% from the past to the present. The areal phosphorus supply in Lake Geneva, in spite of a decrease by 70%, is still characteristic of a meso-to-eutrophic ecosystem. This points towards an incomplete reoligotrophication of the lake. The effects of future climate change on winter mixing and PP dynamics have also been studied. Although there would be a significant reduction in deep mixing, the autotrophic production in Lake Geneva is expected to increase by 20% by the end of 21st century, largely due to stimulation in biomass build-up of temperature-dependent algae (e.g. dinoflagellates and cyanobacteria). Considering our results to represent other large temperate lakes with similar trophic status and water residence time as Lake Geneva, future climate scenarios are expected to bring back symptoms of eutrophication."
7335	Exploratory	"In this short communication, a concept has been presented to model geographical data to predict future temperature of Tabuk, region. Machine learning has been applied to the weather station data to develop a prediction model. The preliminary results are promising and encouraging and are envisaging to further this research towards the determination of unknown temperature rise in the region. This is important to mention here, that the problem has been formulated as a Regression problem, NOT as a classification problem. Hence, applying Convolutional neural networks is not possible, due to the non-existence of classes or converting the temperature values to classes does not make any sense. Hence, this is defined as a regression problem which achieved encouraging desirable results."
2460	Hypothetical	"In the past decade, several efforts have been made to project armed conflict risk into the future. One arising technique is the use of machine-learning (ML) models. In this study we explore its opportunities to project sub-national armed conflict risk for three shared socio-economic pathway (SSP) scenarios and three Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) by 2040-2050 in Africa, using the novel and open-source ML framework CoPro. Results are consistent with the underlying socio-economic storylines of the SSPs, and the resulting out-of-sample armed conflict projections obtained with RandomForest classifiers agree with comparable studies. In SSP1-RCP2.6, conflict risk is low or absent in most regions, although the Horn of Africa and parts of Kenya, Tanzania and Mozambique continue to be conflict-prone. Conflict risk intensifies in the more severe SSP3-RCP6.0 scenario, especially in central Africa and large parts of western Africa. We specifically assessed the role of hydro-climatic indicators as drivers of armed conflict. Overall, their importance is limited but can differ locally depending on the overall sign of climate change impact and the contextual (socio-economic) factors defining the overall magnitude of those impacts. With our study being at the forefront of ML applications for conflict risk projections, we have identified various challenges for this arising scientific field. A major concern is the inconsistent data availability of observed conflict events as well as of socio-economic indicators for the various SSPs. Nevertheless, ML models such as the one presented here are a viable way forward in the field of armed conflict risk projections, and can help to inform the policy-making process with respect to climate security."
8439	Hypothetical	"We introduce temperature zones based on average monthly temperatures that closely align with biome boundaries, intended for use in climate classification. This new system retains the simplicity and interpretability of existing classifications, such as those of Köppen-Geiger and Trewartha, while providing an improved fit to biome boundaries. Unlike previous classifications, we developed our system by analyzing contemporary climate and land cover datasets. Our classification focuses on temperature, but it is designed so that future analyses could combine our results with precipitation criteria from new or existing systems to offer a more comprehensive climate classification framework."
1711	Definitive	"We use a single foraminifera enabled, holistic hydroclimate-to-sediment transient modelling approach to fundamentally evaluate the efficacy of discrete-depth individual foraminifera analysis (IFA) for reconstructing past sea surface temperature (SST) variability from deep-sea sediment archives, a method that has been used for, amongst other applications, reconstructing El Ni√±o Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The computer model environment allows us to strictly control for variables such as sea surface temperature (SST), foraminifera species abundance response to SST, as well as depositional processes such as sediment accumulation rate (SAR) and bioturbation depth (BD), and subsequent laboratory processes such as sample size and machine error. Examining a number of best-case scenarios, we find that IFA-derived reconstructions of past SST variability are sensitive to all of the aforementioned variables. Running 100 ensembles for each scenario, we find that the influence of bioturbation upon IFA-derived SST reconstructions, combined with typical samples sizes employed in the field, produces noisy SST reconstructions with poor correlation to the original SST distribution in the water. This noise is especially apparent for values near the edge of the SST distribution, which is the distribution region of particular interest for, e.g., ENSO. The noise is further increased in the case of increasing machine error, decreasing SAR and decreasing sample size. We also find poor agreement between ensembles, underscoring the need for replication studies in the field to confirm findings at particular sites and time periods. Furthermore, we show that a species‚Äô abundance response to SST could in theory bias IFA-derived SST reconstructions, which can have consequences when comparing IFA-derived SST from markedly different mean climate states. We provide a number of idealised simulations spanning a number of SAR, sample size, machine error and species abundance scenarios, which can help assist researchers in the field to determine under which conditions they could expect to retrieve significant results."
3511	Exploratory	"A short note on climate science and climate policy, discussing planning vs acting, and the differences between decision making and regret under uncertainty and in a deterministic environment."
1677	Hypothetical	"Climate models currently provide conflicting predictions of future climate change across Central Asia. With concern over the potential for a change in water availability to impact communities and ecosystems across the region, an understanding of historical trends in precipitation is required to aid model development and assess the vulnerability of the region to future changes in the hydroclimate. Here we present a record from Lake Baikal, located in the southern Siberian region of central Asia close to the Mongolian border, which demonstrates a relationship between the oxygen isotope composition of diatom silica (_18Odiatom) and precipitation to the region over the 20th and 21st Century. From this, we suggest that annual rates of precipitation in recent times are at their lowest for the past 10,000 years and identify significant long-term variations in precipitation throughout the early to late Holocene interval. Based on comparisons to other regional records, these trends are suggested to reflect conditions across the wider Central Asian region around Lake Baikal and highlight the potential for further changes in precipitation with future climate change."
8239	Definitive	"Understanding how economic systems and ecosystems interact across space is crucial to ensure societal needs are met without compromising environmental quality. Spatially explicit economic models usually describe human activities and ensuing land-use dynamics at a resolution that this is too coarse (typically 10-1000 regions) to understand how these affect many biophysical processes, including ecosystem service supply (which requires billions of 300m or finer grid-cells). Several land-use change models exist that allocate coarse land-use changes at finer spatial scales, but there is no general, global, computationally tractable tool for downscaling to the spatial scale appropriate for understanding landscape and ecosystem change across different land-system scenarios. Here, we present a new model, the Spatial Economic Allocation Landscape Simulator (SEALS), which generates global, high resolution land-use, land-cover maps from coarse projections of land-use change. SEALS advances land-use change modeling research in several ways: it uses a novel machine-learning algorithm to empirically calibrate its parameters; it is a generalized approach that can be applied to very different types of projections within earth-economy models; and it is computationally efficient, generating global results at 300m resolution in approximately 1 hour on a laptop computer. We develop SEALS, and apply it to downscale 6 global scenarios of land-use change from the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) to 300m resolution, which we make publicly available, allowing researchers to project global, fine-scale changes in ecosystem services. For carbon storage and sequestration, we find that, from 2021 to 2100, the SSPs considered result in reductions in carbon storage and sequestration by 3-21%, and baseline results are 9.17% lower than conventional estimates using low-resolution inputs. Consistent with prior estimates, we find that SSPs 3 and 4, which lead to large amounts of tropical deforestation, result in the largest carbon losses, further exacerbating the climate impacts."
6212	Evidential	"Systematic and sustainable monitoring approaches capable of tracking the status and trends of keystone characteristics are critical for detecting aquatic ecosystem degradation, identifying the influence of multiple potential stressors, informing environmental protection policy and anticipating future change. At remote lake-rich landscapes, ability to implement and maintain long-term monitoring is often challenged by logistical and financial constraints. At the Peace-Athabasca Delta (PAD; northeastern Alberta, Canada), an internationally recognized remote freshwater landscape threatened by climate change and upstream industrial development (hydroelectric regulation of river flow, oil sands mining and processing), the need for an integrated aquatic ecosystem monitoring program has long been recognized to track changes to the flood regime, water balance, water quality, and contaminant deposition in the abundant shallow lakes. The remoteness and hydrological complexity of the landscape, among other factors, have hindered the implementation of such a program. In recent years, concern over aquatic ecosystem degradation has led to renewed and urgent calls by international and national governance agencies for implementation of a long-term monitoring program. Here, we report on intensive, multi-faceted research performed during 2015-2021 at 60 lakes spanning the delta’s broad hydroecological gradients to develop, evaluate, and apply a framework for integrated assessment of status and trends in water balance, water chemistry and contaminant enrichment. We present the design and approaches used, synthesize the knowledge gained from data collected during the 7-year-long research phase, and provide a foundation for a long-term aquatic ecosystem monitoring program that addresses several recommendations stemming from assessments by UNESCO and key priorities within the Wood Buffalo National Park Action Plan. We suggest the monitoring framework is readily transferable to other remote shallow lake- and pond-rich landscapes threatened by multiple potential stressors."
2749	Evidential	"Hydroclimate proxy reconstructions and paleoclimate models of the mid-Pliocene warm period provide insight into how, under a moderate greenhouse warming scenario, Earth-system feedbacks may impact regional hydroclimate. However, in the Southwestern United States there is discord between these two types of information: proxy data have been interpreted to indicate much wetter conditions, while the most recent generation of mid-Pliocene warm period climate models simulates drying. We use a water and energy balance framework to directly compare paleoclimate model output to a refined compilation of proxy records of the presence and areal extent of mid-Pliocene lakes. Within this framework, we quantify uncertainties in the proxy system model parameters and in the interpretation of available proxy records. We find that despite these significant uncertainties, most paleoclimate models simulate a regional balance between precipitation and evaporative demand that could not have sustained the extent of recorded lakes from this time. Moreover, the extensive lakes included as boundary conditions in mid-Pliocene warm period climate models are inconsistent with the regional climate simulated by those same models. This study identifies and quantifies the remaining unknowns in our picture of regional mid-Pliocene warm period hydroclimate, with implications for analyses of climate dynamics during this time."
2077	Evidential	"We present a comprehensive composite analysis of the 3D structure of blocks and its response to future climate change over North Pacific, North Atlantic, and Russia in summers and winters. Using reanalysis and two large-ensemble datasets from CESM1 and GFDL-CM3, we investigate the following: The climatology of 3D structure, physical processes governing the temperature anomaly associated with blocks, ability of GCMs to reproduce the 3D structure, and its response to RCP8.5. In reanalysis, over both ocean and land, the anomalous winds are equivalent-barotropic in the troposphere and stratosphere, and temperature anomalies are positive throughout the troposphere and negative in the lower stratosphere. The main seasonal and regional differences are that blocks are larger/stronger in winters, and over oceans, the temperature anomaly is shifted westward due to latent heating. Analyzing the temperature tendency equation shows that in all three sectors, adiabatic warming due to subsidence is the main driver of the positive temperature anomaly; however, depending on season and region, meridional thermal advection and latent heating might have leading-order contributions too. Both GCMs are found to reproduce the climatological 3D structure remarkably well, but sometimes disagree on future changes. Overall, the future summertime response is weakening of all fields (except for specific humidity), although the impact on near-surface temperature is not necessarily weakened; e.g., the blocking-driven near-surface warming over Russia intensifies. The wintertime response is strengthening of all fields, except for temperature in some cases. Responses of geopotential height and temperature are shifted westward in winters, most likely due to latent heating."
5684	Exploratory	"Electricity systems face substantial and growing climate risks which are escalating due to electrification, renewable energy intermittency, population changes, and the intensifying impacts of climate change such as extreme temperatures and weather-induced infrastructure damage. This critical review investigates climate risks to the electricity sector and scrutinizes the methodologies used to represent climate risk in long-term electricity system planning studies. We find that many studies rely on weather data and socio-economic scenarios that are inadequate to fully characterize climate risks to present and future electricity systems. We advocate for more holistic assessments that incorporate comprehensive weather data, acknowledge dynamic multi-sector interactions, and employ adaptive and robust methodologies."
2683	Exploratory	"Earth scientists have a critical role to play in communicating to the public and policy makers what we know about looming societal threats including climate change, extreme natural events, resource conflicts and the energy transition. But whilst geoscientists are being encouraged - and, increasingly, trained - to ‘go public’ with our science, what is less clear is to what extent our current geo-communications are effectively addressing the long-term planetary concerns that confront society.  In this paper we argue that scientists are the interface between the research organisations that produce knowledge and the wider public who could use that knowledge, and, in that regard, are akin to marketers in the business world. Drawing from the dominant paradigms that shape business marketing, we re-consider the prevailing models of science communication and their consequent sense of purpose. We identify three dominant approaches of marketing-led science communication: ‘make-and-sell’; ‘sense-and-respond’; and ‘guide-and-co-create’. We judge the first two to be incompatible with delivering long-term sustainability, in contrast to the emergent guide-and-co-create mode - purpose-driven, interdisciplinary, participatory, and reflexive - which we contend is best placed to tackle long-term geo-environmental concerns through having a clear wellbeing- focused objective whilst co-creating the path to achieving it.  We conclude with the contention that adopting a guide-and-co-create approach to science communications will require not only rethinking communication practice within universities but also radical institutional regime change towards universities becoming purpose-driven organisations."
1809	Evidential	"Coral reefs may provide a beneficial first line of defence against tsunami hazards, though this is currently debated. Using a fully nonlinear, Boussinesq propagation model, we examine the buffering capacity of the Great Barrier Reef against tsunamis triggered by several hypothetical sources: a series of far-field, Solomon Islands earthquake sources of various magnitudes (Mw 8.0, Mw 8.5, and Mw 9.0), a submarine landslide source that has previously been documented in the offshore geological record (i.e. the Gloria Knolls Slide), and a potential future landslide source (i.e. the Noggin Block). We show that overall, the Great Barrier Reef acts as a large-scale regional buffer due to the roughness of coral cover and the complex bathymetric features (i.e. platforms, shoals, terraces, etc.) that corals construct over thousands of years. However, the buffering effect of coral cover is much stronger for tsunamis that are higher in amplitude. When coral cover is removed, the largest earthquake scenario (Mw 9.0) exhibits up to a 31% increase in offshore wave amplitude and estimated run-up. These metrics increase even more for landslide scenarios, where they tend to double. These discrepancies can be explained by the higher bed particle velocities incited by higher-amplitude waves, which leads to greater frictional dissipation at a seabed covered by coral. At a site-specific level, shoreline orientation relative to the reef platforms also determines the degree of protectiveness against both types of tsunamis, where areas situated behind broad, shallow, coral-covered platforms benefit the most. Additionally, we find that the platforms, rather than gaps in the offshore reef structure, tend to amplify wave trains through wave focussing when coral cover is removed from simulations. Our findings have implications for future tsunami hazards along the northeastern Australian coastline, particularly as the physiological stressors imposed by anthropogenic climate change further exacerbate coral die-off and reductions in ecosystem complexity. Therefore, areas that experience a protective benefit by the Great Barrier Reef‚Äôs platforms could be disproportionately more vulnerable in the future."
7482	Hypothetical	"People alter the earth’s surface in diverse and prolific ways, from enhancing physical and chemical erosion to controlling water transport across drainage networks. These modifications are often faster, more extensive, and wholly novel when compared to natural landscape evolutionary processes. Existing literature largely portrays people as independent of a landscape’s geologic and climatic context. However, we suggest that humans are fundamentally embedded within the geomorphic system. Anthropogenic alteration of the earth’s surface results in landscapes that reflect both the socio-economic-technological settings driven by human need and the underlying climate and geology. Given that human impacts create similar novel combinations of landforms across the world, we suggest an opportunity for focused study of these “novel landforms.” Distinctly anthropogenic landscapes without natural analogues, novel landforms cannot be explained without incorporation of people as an explicit geomorphic process. We propose a unifying framework for the study of novel landforms and demonstrate the opportunities available for more systematic, generalizable research on human-coupled geomorphology."
7847	Exploratory	"The analysis of health system resilience has progressed significantly, yet there remains a wide diversity in the conceptual frameworks used. The ClimHB conceptual framework, developed in 2019, integrates two influential models: the Levesque model of healthcare access and DFID's resilience framework. Designed to study health system resilience in response to climate-induced events, the ClimHB framework uniquely positions the population as an active participant on the demand side, complementing the supply side of health services and providers. Characterised by three core dimensions – exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity – this dual focus on demand and supply, and their interactions emphasises the dynamic interplay between both sides in shaping health system resilience. A workshop utilising framework analysis, and the World Café method refined the ClimHB framework by integrating empirical evidence from Haiti and Bangladesh, alongside insights from a literature review. The revised framework presents a dynamic understanding of interrelated resilience, aimed at informing decision-making across all levels of healthcare. It emphasises the importance of contextual factors, strengthens outcome linkages, and incorporates socio-economic and ecological considerations. Governance, professional awareness, and supply-side feedback loops were also emphasised. Site studies demonstrated the framework’s adaptability and ability to foster synergy between theory and implementation. However, challenges persist in operationalising the framework, particularly for policymakers, emphasising the need for validation, standardised measures, and a deeper understanding of resilience interplays. Future research should explore the framework’s implications for structural management, training, and resource allocation, addressing critical gaps in resilience research."
5686	Definitive	"Here, we show that the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) provides a stronger constraint on equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS), the global warming from increasing greenhouse gases, after accounting for temperature patterns. Feedbacks governing ECS depend on spatial patterns of surface temperature (“pattern effects”); hence, using the LGM to constrain future warming requires quantifying how temperature patterns produce different feedbacks during LGM cooling versus modern-day warming. Combining data assimilation reconstructions with atmospheric models, we show that the climate is more sensitive to LGM forcing because ice sheets amplify extratropical cooling where feedbacks are destabilizing. Accounting for LGM pattern effects yields a median modern-day ECS of 2.4°C, 66% range 1.7° to 3.5°C (1.4° to 5.0°C, 5 to 95%), from LGM evidence alone. Combining the LGM with other lines of evidence, the best estimate becomes 2.9°C, 66% range 2.4° to 3.5°C (2.1° to 4.1°C, 5 to 95%), substantially narrowing uncertainty compared to recent assessments."
6390	Evidential	"Westerly winds from the eastern equatorial Pacific direct moisture into the Western Cordillera of the northern tropical Andes, where subsequent orographic lifting creates the wettest regions in the world. The Choco low-level jet is emblematic of broader westerly winds in this region and is projected to weaken by the end of the 21st century, but climate models show considerable disagreement about the extent of weakening. Using contemporary observations, we demonstrate that the configuration of westerly winds in the eastern equatorial Pacific is reflected by hydrogen isotopes in precipitation (Œ¥Dp ) in Ecuador. As westerly winds strengthen, Œ¥D p increases from greater transport of enriched Œ¥D vapor from the Eastern Pacific Warm Pool. We apply this framework to a new record of reconstructed Œ¥Dp using leaf waxes in ocean sediments off the coast of Ecuador (ODP1239, 0 ‚ó¶ 40.32 0 S, 82 ‚ó¶ 4.86 0 W) that span the Plio-Pleistocene. Low Œ¥D p in the early Pliocene indicates weak westerly water vapor transport in a warmer climate state, which is attributed to a low sea surface temperature gradient between the cold tongue and off-equatorial regions in the eastern equatorial Pacific. Near the end-Pliocene (Àú3 Ma), westerly water vapor transport weakens, possibly from shifts in the Intertropical Convergence Zone, forced by high latitude Northern Hemisphere cooling. In complementary isotope-enabled climate simulations, a weak Choco jet and westerly water vapor transport in the early Pliocene are matched by a decrease in Œ¥D p and hydroclimate changes in the northern tropical Andes. Precipitation from the Choco jet can cause deadly landslides and weakened westerly winds in the early Pliocene implies a southward shift of these hazards along the Pacific coast of the northern tropical Andes in the future."
7840	Definitive	"Rapidly changing climate conditions and the increase in extreme events are posing severe challenges to human life and infrastructure, requiring sophisticated analytical capabilities for hazard prediction and disaster risk management. Earth System Data Cubes (ESDCs) have become an essential tool in Earth System Sciences (ESS) by organizing large-scale, multivariate environmental datasets into a structured, scalable and analysis-ready format. However, modern machine learning techniques are not yet being utilized to their full potential on ESDCs. This is due to the lack of proper tooling, domain-specific challenges, and high barriers of entry for practitioners. We introduce ml4xcube, an open-source Python framework designed to assist ESS domain experts in applying ML techniques on ESDCs for advanced analysis and prediction of environmental variables and impacts. Through a comprehensive suite of tools, it addresses specific challenges associated with the nature of ESS data, such as the non-uniform data distribution due to dynamic gaps, or spatio-temporal autocorrelation of environmental variables. Due to its modular architecture, it covers the complete analysis process, from data exploration, and preparation, to model development, result interpretation and evaluation. With support for distributed computing, it handles large ESDC datasets efficiently. In order to ease the adoption it includes extensive documentation and tutorial notebooks. We demonstrate ml4xcube’s capabilities through three examples, showcasing its potential and capabilities for integrating machine learning with ESDC data."
2307	Exploratory	"Solar geoengineering describes a set of proposals to deliberately alter the earth‚Äôs radiative balance to reduce climate risks. We elicit judgements on natural science research priorities for solar geoengineering through a survey and in-person discussion with 72 subject matter experts, including two thirds of all scientists with ‚â•10 publications on the topic. Experts prioritized Earth system response (33%) and impacts on society and ecosystems (27%) over the human and social dimensions (17%) and developing or improving solar geoengineering methods (15%), with most allocating no effort to weather control or counter-geoengineering. While almost all funding to date has focused on geophysical modeling and social sciences, our experts recommended substantial funding for observations (26%), perturbative field experiments (16%), laboratory research (11%) and engineering for deployment (11%). Of the specific proposals, stratospheric aerosols received the highest average priority (34%) then marine cloud brightening (17%) and cirrus cloud thinning (10%). The views of experts with ‚â•10 publications were generally consistent with experts with <10 publications, though when asked to choose the radiative forcing for their ideal climate scenario only 40% included solar geoengineering compared to 70% of experts with <10 publications. This suggests that those who have done more solar geoengineering research are less supportive of its use in climate policy. We summarize specific research recommendations and challenges that our experts identified, the most salient of which were fundamental uncertainties around key climate processes, novel challenges related to solar geoengineering as a design problem, and the challenges of public and policymaker engagement."
2793	Hypothetical	"During the late Eocene to the early Oligocene, marine records document a globally congruent record of declining carbon dioxide concentrations, Antarctic icesheet growth, and associated reorganisation of the global climate system. In contrast, the few existing terrestrial records demonstrate high heterogeneity of environmental change and are difficult to reconcile with those of the oceanic realm. Global drivers for climatic change are particularly difficult to disentangle from regional ones, especially those caused by the complex tectonic evolution of the Tibetan region and its influence on the Asian monsoon system and vegetation. Here, we reconstruct the climatic and environmental history from the late Eocene into the early Oligocene at L√ºhe Basin, Yunnan, China, a key sedimentary repository along the SE margin of the Tibetan Plateau and an important region for assessing Asian monsoon changes. We investigate a 340-m long section via a multi-proxy approach and climate model simulations. The organic geochemical proxies, via n-alkanes, terpenoids, and hopanes, suggest that thermally immature sediments were deposited in a terrestrial flood plain basin that was primarily occupied by gymnosperms and angiosperms. Branched glycerol diakyl glycerol tetraethers indicate relatively stable temperatures (ca. 10 ¬∞C) throughout the section, including across the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. This temperature, cooler than the modern-day average for this site (ca. 15 ¬∞C), suggests that this area has not undergone significant uplift since the Oligocene. To further contextualize our data, we tested a suite of climate model simulations with varying pCO2, paleogeography, and Tibetan topography across the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. This data-model comparison suggests that a response to regional factors might explain the absence of a pronounced cooling at L√ºhe across the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, supporting the emerging picture that the global expression of the EOT in terrestrial environments is more complex than indicated by the marine record."
6506	Evidential	"Climate change influences both average states and extremes in temperatures and precipitation. Southeast Asia, one of the most vulnerable regions worldwide to floods and heatwaves, indicates an escalation of the possibility of severe climate extremes. Extreme precipitation events can bring increasing floods, leading to considerable damage to property and human well-being. However, droughts also occur in Southeast Asia due to changing precipitation patterns in different regions. In big cities, such damages and risks are highly influential, given the large population density and the proximity to the coast or rivers. Global Earth system models predict the average trends and extremes of the climate system, including record-shattering extreme events that have exceeded previous records. I use the recently released Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6), a multi-model large ensemble of climate predictions under different scenarios, to investigate changes in climate conditions in ten highly populated Southeast Asian cities. I first evaluated the CMIP6 simulations in the present day (2005-2014) in the ten cities and found good consistency in temperature and precipitation. Then, I examine changes in the mean, minimum, and maximum temperature and precipitation on an annual, monthly, and daily basis, respectively, under the high-emission SSP5-8.5 scenario. Furthermore, in the late century, annual maximum temperatures hit more than 40 °C in Bangkok, Chiang Mai, and Vientiane. Cities in our study are projected to experience 5-6 °C increases in temperature from November to April, indicating significant changes in the seasonal cycle. Precipitation increases significantly from May to October in most large cities in our study, except for Johor Bahru, Malaysia, where some summer precipitation reductions are expected. Yangon, in particular, is projected to increase more than 4 millimeters per day in July, indicating a very high challenge from flooding as a city facing flood risk every year at present. In summary, our results indicate significant changes in the mean and extreme states of temperature and precipitations in Southeast Asia. Based on these, I identified major physical risks of climate change among the ten cities. Decision-makers should build resilience to these risks to avoid significant damage. Yukiko Hirabayashi et al. (2013) discovered that the risks of floods increase due to the degree of warming. Increasing floods might lead to damage to households and other organisms. Moreover, a greater incidence of climate change, such as droughts, in Southeast Asia is caused by decreasing precipitation in regions (Teerachai Amnuaylojaroen and Pavinee Chanvichit (2019)). This investigation particularly utilizes CMIP6 model simulations to predict the future pattern of climate extremes based on historical and present statistics. CMIP6 performs well in reproducing the climatological spatial distribution of temperature and precipitation, with better performance for temperature than precipitation to predict near future and future climate extremes is that it (Yang et al. for China). With large-ensemble data for climate extremes, CMIP6 can predict more precise climate extremes. This model is necessary for research about extreme climate, as it addresses the climate system's natural variability in different regions with different topographic features."
5565	Evidential	"Kavre district, Nepal, is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, including increases in erratic rainfall, drought, floods, and landslides. As gender roles, culture, age, physical and physiological characteristics increase, mainly Nepalese women's and children's, health risks associated with climate change and air pollution, listening to and learning from women is critical. This study explores women's perspectives and lived experiences concerning climate change, consequent adverse impacts on agriculture and health, and ongoing adaptation and mitigation strategies. Assessing perspectives and lived experiences related to climate change can offer opportunities to explore understanding, local beliefs, experiences with adverse impacts and adaptation. We used a descriptive qualitative approach. An equal number of focus group discussions (FGDs, n=8) and key-informant interviews (KIIs, n=8) were conducted. Purposive and snowball sampling were used to recruit participants. Four research assistants with public health backgrounds and climate change training were employed to assist with this work. All interviews were conducted in the Nepali language using an interview guide. All KIIs and FGDs were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim in Nepali. Data were analyzed in NVivo 1.7 using content analysis. Forty-two of the 48 participants identified as women. The largest proportion of participants was aged greater than or equal to 50 years (18/48), had no formal education (21/48), and were either older women (>55 years) (13/48) or mothers of children younger than five (11/48). Three main topical areas emerged from the FGDs and KIIs: (i) the winds of change, (ii) the unpredictability of weather, and (iii) acting locally. The study provides insights into how women and children in rural communities in a Nepali hill district experience, adapt and mitigate climate change impacts. These findings can help inform the development of interventions to better address women's and children's needs and concerns, essential to promoting well-being and reducing impacts exacerbated by climate change."
4852	Evidential	"Water scarcity is a major global problem with the potential to impact socioeconomic development and the environment. Currently, mitigating issues related to the lack of water has become an aim for the public and private sectors. Water scarcity can be estimated by the ratio between water use (withdrawal or consumption) and water availability (a minimum discharge), named Water Stress Index (WSI). But some uncertainties can influence the perception of water scarcity, such as population growth, land cover, climate changes, uncontrolled water use, and the scale at which the WSI is evaluated. To improve the knowledge about water management in two basins in eastern Legal Amazon, We estimated WSI at unit-catchments scale from MGB hydrologic model, water use data, and climate change projections. Our results showed a safe water situation in most parts of the basins, but first-order unit-catchments need more attention due to high WSI values being able to compromise downstream water use."
6044	Exploratory	"Historical weather records from Europe indicate that the Earth experienced substantial climate variability, which caused, for instance, the Little Ice Age and the global crisis in the period between the 14th and 19th centuries. However, it is still unclear how global this climate variability was because of the scarce meteorological data availability in other regions including East Asia, especially around the 17th century. In this context, Seungjeongwon Ilgi, a daily record of the Royal Secretariat of the Joseon Dynasty of Korea, is a precious source of historical meteorological records for the Korean Peninsula, as it covers 288 years of weather observations made during 1623-1910. We used the digital database of Seungjeongwon Ilgi to construct a machine-readable weather condition dataset. To this end, we extracted valid weather information from the original weather description text and compiled them into predefined weather categories. Additionally, we attempted to improve the usability of the dataset by converting the reported dates in the traditional calendar system to those in the Gregorian calendar. Finally, we outlined the promising implications of this dataset for meteorological and climatological studies, while describing the limitations of the dataset. Overall, future studies focusing on the climate and weather of the past could use this meteorological database for investigating long-term climate variability. Our datasets are publicly available at 10.5281/zenodo.8142701."
1520	Evidential	"Carbon capture and storage (CCS) can help nations meet their Paris CO2 reduction commitments cost-effectively. However, lack of confidence in geologic CO2 storage security remains a barrier to CCS implementation. Here we present a numerical program that calculates CO2 storage security and leakage to the atmosphere over 10,000 years. This combines quantitative estimates of geological subsurface CO2 retention, and of surface CO2 leakage. We calculate that realistically well-regulated storage in regions with moderate well densities has a 50% probability that leakage remains below 0.0008% per year, with over 98% of the injected CO2 retained in the subsurface over 10,000 years. An unrealistic scenario, where CO2 storage is inadequately regulated, estimates that more than 78% will be retained over 10,000 years. Our modelling results suggest that geological storage of CO2 can be a secure climate change mitigation option, but we note that long-term behaviour of CO2 in the subsurface remains a key uncertainty."
5902	Evidential	"The Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC, 2019--2020), a year-long drift with the Arctic sea ice, has provided the scientific community with an unprecedented, multidisciplinary dataset from the Eurasian Arctic Ocean, covering high atmosphere to deep ocean across all seasons. However, the heterogeneity of data and the superposition of spatial and temporal variability, intrinsic to a drift campaign, complicate the interpretation of observations. In this study, we have compiled a quality-controlled physical hydrographic dataset with best spatio-temporal coverage and derived core parameters, including the mixed layer depth, heat fluxes over key layers, and friction velocity. We provide a comprehensive and accessible overview of the ocean conditions encountered along the MOSAiC drift, discuss their interdisciplinary implications, and compare common ocean climatologies to these new data. Our results indicate that, for the most part, ocean variability was dominated by regional rather than seasonal signals, carrying potentially strong implications for ocean biogeochemistry, ecology, sea ice, and even atmospheric conditions. Near-surface ocean properties were strongly influenced by the relative position of sampling, within or outside the river-water influenced Transpolar Drift, and seasonal warming and meltwater input. Ventilation down to the Atlantic Water layer in the Nansen Basin allowed for a stronger connectivity between subsurface heat and the sea ice and surface ocean via elevated upward heat fluxes. The Yermak Plateau and Fram Strait regions were characterized by heterogeneous water mass distributions, energetic ocean currents, and stronger lateral gradients in surface water properties in frontal regions. Together with the presented results and core parameters, we offer context for interdisciplinary research, fostering an improved understanding of the complex, coupled Arctic System."
7328	Exploratory	"Glacier volume in the Himalaya is projected to shrink by 53–70% during this century due to climate change. However, the impact of changes in precipitation amount and distribution on future glacier change remains uncertain because mesoscale meteorology is not represented in current models that project glacier change. We explored the combined effects of past and future changes in air temperature and precipitation amount and distribution on the evolution of Khumbu Glacier in the Everest region of Nepal—a benchmark glacier in the monsoon-influenced Nepal Himalaya—using a climate-glacier modelling approach that forces an ice-dynamical glacier evolution model with a surface mass balance forcing that includes mesoscale meteorological variables derived from downscaling of Regional Climate Model outputs. Our simulations show that historical warming during the late Holocene has committed Khumbu Glacier to future volume loss of 10–23% during this century. Under moderate future warming (RCP4.5) from the present day, Khumbu Glacier could lose 70% volume by 2100 CE due to increasing air temperatures. However, the projected increase in precipitation in tandem with climate warming could offset half of this loss, such that the total decrease in glacier volume by 2100 CE compared to the present day is only 34%. Extreme future warming (RCP8.5) will not be compensated by  changes in precipitation but will instead result in substantial ablation above 6,000 m, causing the highest glacier on Earth to vanish between 2160–2260 CE."
8588	Hypothetical	"Addressing the climate crisis is an urgent global priority, yet the healthcare sector continues to face significant challenges in implementing long-term green solutions. The sector accounts for 4.4% of global carbon emissions, with an even greater impact of 7% in the Netherlands. The latest Dutch report- Barometer Groene OK- proposes ten key measures to reduce the healthcare carbon footprint, including a shift from disposable to reusable materials. Although reusable instruments are often promoted as a sustainable alternative, their environmental impact within healthcare is contentious due to resource-intensive sterilization procedures. This critical commentary evaluates the environmental implications of reusable versus disposable surgical instruments, drawing on insights from the existing literature. Although further research is necessary, the initial findings suggest that, under current sterilization practices, disposable instruments may still have a lower environmental impact. At present, the assumption that reusable instruments are inherently more sustainable is overly simplistic. The adoption of sustainable packaging and the optimization of sterilization processes are essential steps to significantly reduce the carbon footprint of reusable instruments; however, these advancements may require several years to develop and to achieve widespread implementation. Switching prematurely to reusable surgical instruments can inadvertently increase the environmental footprint of the sector. Instead, a gradual transition - emphasising sustainable manufacturing of disposable instruments - alongside advances in sterilisation procedures - offers a more balanced and effective pathway toward sustainability in healthcare."
7193	Exploratory	"Examining the spatiotemporal dynamics of meteorological variables in the context of changing climate, particularly in countries where rainfed agriculture, and hydropower project are predominant, is vital to assess climate-induced change. CORDEX Africa has been developed to forecast Africa's climate variation and variabilities. the RCA4 regional climate model performance of CORDEX Africa domains have not been evaluated yet. Therefore, this finding is aimed to evaluate RCA4 CORDEX Africa RCMs performance in the Gilgal Gibe Watershed, Omo basin, Ethiopia. The observed rainfall and temperature data for five stations obtained from National Metrological Agent were used for bias correction of the RCMs. First the accuracy of simulation results was evaluated using as suite of statistical measures such as Bias, Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and correlation coefficient, and the result was found that the performance of model is satisfactory. After evaluating performance model, the data have been analyzed using coefficient of variation, anomaly index and precipitation concentration index. Furthermore, Mann-Kendell test was used to detect the time series trend. the result revealed that there is non-significantly declining of trend for annual in all stations: -0.0101cm/year, :0.0044cm/year: -0.00441cm/year, 0.0057cm/year, and -0.0939cm/year for Dedo, Assendabo, Sekoru, Omonad and Jimma, respectively. and for maximum and minimum temperature the result has shown that there is significant increasing trend in annually. lastly future climate change (2025-2050) have been investigated, and 60% of stations have shown decrease in annual rainfall under RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 scenario. where temperature of study area has shown that there is increasing monthly maximum and minimum temperature in all stations under RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 scenario."
8151	Definitive	"Pedestrian-level wind plays a critical role in shaping the urban microclimate and is significantly influenced by urban form and geometry. The most common method for determining spatial wind speed patterns in cities relies on numerical computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations, which resolve Navier-Stokes equations around buildings. While effective, these simulations are computationally intensive and require specialised expertise, limiting their broader applicability. To address these limitations, this study proposes a more cost-effective alternative while maintaining the accuracy and spatial patterns captured by CFD. We developed a machine learning (ML) approach to predict wind speed patterns from prevailing wind directions and three- dimensional urban morphology, which are increasingly available for global cities. The model is trained and tested using a comprehensive dataset of 512 numerical simulations of urban neighbourhoods, representing diverse morphological configurations in cities worldwide. We find that the ML algorithm accurately predicts complex wind patterns, achieving a normalised mean absolute error of less than 10%, which is comparable to wind anemometer measurement in a low wind speed environment. In predicting wind statistics, the ML model also surpasses that of regression models based solely on statistical representations of urban morphology. The R2 values measuring grid-level agreement between ML and CFD range from 0.94-0.99 and 0.65-0.95, respectively, for the idealised and whole datasets. However, we find that grid-based R2 is not an effective metric for evaluating the 2D model performance due to localised biases arising from faster wind speed grid regions, which is revealed by the wind probability density function. This further confirms the suitability of the ML models for capturing wind distributions at pedestrian height. These findings demonstrate that complex pedestrian wind patterns can be effectively predicted using an image-based ML approach, circumventing the need to resolve complex physical equations directly."
2754	Definitive	"Climate-change exposes an increasing share of the world population to potentially lethal heat, a threat accentuated by rapid urbanization. Here, we project occurrence of future deadly heat for urban agglomerations around the world until 2080 by using CMIP6 climate model projections of temperature and relative humidity, urbanization prospects and GDP projections from the SSP scenarios. We show that while nearly all regions within latitudes 35°S - 45°N experience an  increase in days of deadly heat, Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeastern Asia are particularly exposed, a trend exacerbated by rapid urbanization. By 2080, between 2.3 (59\%) (SSP1-2.6) and 3.0 (75\%) (SSP5-8.5) billion urban dwellers will experience more than 30 annual days of deadly heat, including 477 (66\%) - 546 (77\%) million in Sub-Saharan Africa and 988 (93\%) - 993 million (94\%) in South and South-Eastern Asia. The exposure to heat is highly unequal, with some of the poorest regions affected the most. Our results imply that jointly mitigating climate change, planning for well-ventilated cities, and combating poverty to enable economic access to air conditioning is required to avert a global-scale humanitarian crisis."
6498	Hypothetical	"Groundwater is crucial for Africa's potable water supply, agriculture, and economic development. However, the continent faces challenges with groundwater scarcity due to factors like population growth, climate change, and over exploitation. Over the past ten years, machine learning has been increasingly and successfully used in groundwater level prediction across the world. This review paper explores the application of machine learning techniques in predicting groundwater levels in Africa. The methodology involved downloading relevant papers, identifying and categorizing the machine learning algorithms employed, and quantifying their use. Geological and climatic variables were also identified, analyzed and categorized to measure their usage frequency. The different algorithms and input variables extracted from each paper are graphically represented in this document highlighting the most employed ones. The findings suggest that the available literature on this topic in Africa is limited compared to the rest of the world. Tree-based algorithms are commonly used in machine learning in Africa, and the most employed input variables are related to geomorphology and temperature. The study highlights the potential of machine learning in improving water resource management and decision-making in the region."
6037	Exploratory	"Amidst the escalating impacts of climate change and extreme weather events, participatory decision-making in water management stands out as a sustainable approach for disaster risk reduction. Hydrological disasters, such as floods and droughts, are increasing globally due to anthropogenic activities, necessitating adaptation in water infrastructure. The OECD projects severe water stress for 2.3 billion people by 2050 without new policies, affecting production and triggering conflicts. Water management solutions, employing participatory socio-hydrology, provide a sustainable framework. Thus, this article introduces three segments - Bronze-2-Gold, ReWASH, and JEDI AWAKENS - reconciling energy, water demand, and socio-hydrology. Bronze-2-Gold focuses on zero emissions and sustainable development. ReWASH addresses scarcity by recycling water, promoting a circular economy. JEDI AWAKENS emphasizes climate justice, equity, and inclusion in sustainable management, advocating for knowledge dissemination and social participation. The CASH Paradox highlights interdependencies between ecosystems, climate, and human systems, emphasizing the need for balanced policies. This multidisciplinary effort advocates for a future with zero emissions, mitigating risks, and promoting resilience."
2826	Exploratory	"Climate change is very crucial for ecological systems and society. But Global climate models run at coarse spatial resolution which is difficult to do regional analysis. Regional-scale projections can be obtained by a technique called statistical downscaling which uses past data to find out the high resolution and low-resolution mapping. There are many methods for statistical downscaling of climate data: 1) Conventional methods 2) Deep learning architecture. Some of the existing works like DeepSd downscaled High-resolution climate projections but in such cases, Global climate model (GCM) data suffers from concept drift, change of mapping between input and label over time. So applying these deep learning models is not a good idea for statistical downscaling. In our study, we have developed new approach of downscaling which outperforms other deep learning architectures like super-resolution convolutional neural network (SRCNN), Long short term memory network (LSTM) in terms of accuracy and reliability. These existing models focus on minimizing the root mean square error (RMSE ) and do not take care of the tails or extremes. Therefore the objective function of these models should be changed other than root mean square error (RMSE). Our proposed model focuses on both means and extremes. We provide a comparison between proposed and other existing deep learning models in downscaling daily precipitation and temperature from 1.25 to 0.25 resolution over India. We have downscaled 6 Global climate model (GCM) models in our comparative study."
4870	Hypothetical	"In hydrology and water resources management, scenario-neutral methods are already common, mostly used to rapidly compare system responses to plausible changes in climate. As a first application in glaciology, a scenario-neutral approach, using climatic mass balance as a system response, is applied to four glaciers: Hintereisferner (AT), Peyto Glacier (CA), Austre Br√∏ggerbreen (NO) and Abramov Glacier (KGZ). The Open Global Glacier Model (OGGM) is used to perform a scenario-neutral glacier sensitivity analysis, resulting in visual, two-dimensional response surfaces, and a glacier sensitivity index (GSI). In addition, four Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 models (CMIP6) (FGOALS3, MPI-ESM1, EG-Earth 3, NorESM2), under four Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) (1-2.6, 2-4.5, 3-7.0, 5-8.5) are overlaid, for comparison. Assessing results shows that overall, Hintereisferner is most sensitive to changes in climate overall, and temperature especially, with a temperature GSI of 1.12 m w.e./¬∞C - 1.96 m w.e./¬∞C, versus, for example, a temperature GSI of 0.56 m w.e./¬∞C - 0.81 m w.e./¬∞C for Peyto glacier. Seasonally, we see differences in sensitivity between climatic variables and glaciers, too. Overlaying time slices of the CMIP6 models emphasizes how scenario-neutral approaches are suitable for use in glacier modelling, especially as a framework for sensitivity studies."
7187	Evidential	"Climate change is expected to exacerbate the frequency and intensity of drought in many water-limited regions. However, future drought changes in Australia ‚Äìthe driest inhabited continent on Earth‚Äì have remained stubbornly uncertain due to a lack of model agreement in projected precipitation changes in most regions. We use an ensemble of future projections from the National Hydrological Projections to assess future drought changes in Australia. The ensemble of 32 simulations was created using the Australian Landscape Water Balance model (AWRA-L) forced by four global climate models (GCMs) from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 5 that were downscaled and bias-corrected using four alternative methods. This ensemble provided an opportunity to analyse multiple sources of uncertainty on the future projections and quantify changes across multiple drought types (meteorological, hydrological and agricultural). We show future increases in the time spent under drought for all three drought types, with largest increases projected in winter and spring. The future changes are particularly robust in the highly populated and agricultural regions of Australia, suggesting potential impacts on agricultural activities, ecosystems and urban water supply. We attributed uncertainty in future drought changes to GCMs, downscaling/bias correction methods and emissions scenarios. GCMs represent the largest source of uncertainty but the choice of downscaling method is also important. The emissions scenarios were the lowest source of uncertainty but influenced the magnitude and spatial extent of robust future changes. Overall, the projections suggest likely future increases in drought in Australia with little evidence for ameliorating drought risk with climate change despite ongoing uncertainty in future changes in parts of the country."
8817	Hypothetical	"The rapid warming in polar regions highlights the need to monitor climate change impacts such as glacier retreat and related global sea level rise. Glacier area is an essential climate variable but its tracking is complicated by the labour-intensive manual digitisation of satellite imagery. Here we introduce ICEmapper, a deep learning model that maps glacier outlines from Sentinel-1 time series with accuracy on par with human experts. We used this model to retrieve Svalbard glacier outlines for 2016‚Äì2024 and found a tripling of the glacier area loss rate (-260 km2 p.a.) in the last decade as compared to that previously reported for 1980‚Äì2010 (-80 km2 p.a.). This acceleration is largely driven by increased calving at tidewater glaciers and the climatic warming signal impacting land-terminating glaciers. Additionally, our analysis shows significant area changes related to glacier surging, namely, the Nathorstbreen system and Austfonna, Basin-3 surges. These two surges collectively added to the area change in 2006‚Äì2016 (+194.30 km2 or +0.59%), thus delaying the regionwide area loss by approximately two years. Our results indicate a significant acceleration in glacier area loss in Svalbard, and we anticipate broader applications of our method to track glacier changes on larger scales."
5695	Exploratory	This paper presents the application of the K√∂ppen climate classification system for two remote regions in Turkey. The author describes the K√∂ppen system and the history of climate classification briefly. The author uses the meteorological data of Mersin province in the Mediterranean region and Sinop province in the Black Sea region. The author compares the results with the existing classification in the conclusion.
7495	Evidential	"Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) can originate from a variety of reasons, including water pollution coming from agriculture, effluent from treatment plants, sewage system leaks, pH and light levels, and the consequences of climate change. In recent years, HAB events have become a serious environmental problem, paralleling population growth, agricultural development, increasing air temperatures, and declining precipitation. Hence, it is crucial to identify the mechanisms responsible for the formation of harmful algal blooms (HABs), accurately assess their short- and long-term impacts, and quantify their variations based on climate projections for developing accurate action plans and effectively managing resources. This present study utilizes empirical dynamic modeling (EDM) to predict chlorophyll-a (chl-a) concentration of Lake Erie. This method is characterized by its nonlinearity and nonparametric nature. EDM has a significant benefit in that it surpasses the constraints of conventional statistical modeling through the use of data-driven attractor reconstruction. Chl-a is a critical and commonly used parameter in the prediction of HAB events. Lake Erie is an inland water body that experiences frequent HAB phenomena as a result of its location. With a MAPE of 4.31%, an RMSE of 6.24, and a coefficient of determination of 0.98, the EDM showed exceptional performance. These findings suggest that the underlying dynamics of chl-a changes can be well captured by the EDM model."
8084	Hypothetical	"Compound climate hazards, such as co-occurring temperature and precipitation extremes, substantially impact people and ecosystems. Internal climate variability combines with the forced global warming response to determine both the magnitude and spatial distribution of these events, and their consequences can propagate from one country to another via many pathways. We examine how exposure to compound climate hazards in one country is transmitted internationally via agricultural trade networks by analyzing a large ensemble of climate model simulations and comprehensive trade data of four crops (i.e. wheat, maize, rice and soya). Combinations of variability-driven climate patterns and existing global agricultural trade give rise to a wide range of possible outcomes in the current climate. In the most extreme simulated year, 20% or more of the caloric supply in nearly one third of the world’s countries are exposed to compound heat and precipitation hazards. Countries with low levels of diversification, both in the number of suppliers and the regional climates of those suppliers, are more likely to import higher fractions of calories (up to 93%) that are exposed to these compound hazards. Understanding how calories exposed to climate hazards are transmitted through agricultural trade networks in the current climate can contribute to improved anticipatory capacity for national governments, international trade policy, and agricultural-sector resilience. We recommend concerted effort be made toward merging cutting-edge seasonal-to-decadal climate prediction with international trade analysis in support of a new era of anticipatory Anthropocene risk management."
5911	Evidential	"We present Interferometric Synthetic Aperture data spanning a series of precipitation events that impacted the southern edge of the Arabian Peninsula in 2017-2018.  The arid climate, sparse vegetation and low topographic relief result in very high interferometric coherence magnitude between most pairs of dates, even for those separated by multiple years. For pairs of dates with differing soil moisture conditions, such as a “dry” date and a date immediately following one of the precipitation events, the interferometric coherence magnitude is much lower.  However, pairs spanning the same event, but with a longer time interval, have high interferometric coherence magnitude.  This observation suggests that the phase changes that result in lower coherence for some pairs are not permanent, such as those that would result from erosion or deposition of material, but are due to the variations in soil moisture.   In support of this view, when we compare the phase of individual pixels to their neighbors, we observe similar phase change trends for each precipitation event. We present a simple statistical model of the relationship between soil moisture and phase, and show that it predicts the observed coherence and phase histories within this particular SAR time series.  We also show how the parameters of this relationship can be inferred from the InSAR observables, and can be used to reduce the soil moisture effects on coherence and phase even for pairs of dates that were not used in that parameter estimation.  For the test data considered here, the noise associated with soil moisture is lowered by 40%. We present results for synthetic time series, including a demonstration of the widely-observed phenomenon that displacement rates inferred from InSAR time series depend on the choice of interferometric pairs used in the analysis."
3361	Hypothetical	"The Arctic Ocean is strongly stratified by salinity in the uppermost layers. This stratification is a key attribute of the region as it acts as an effective barrier for the vertical exchanges of Atlantic Water heat, nutrients, and CO2 between intermediate depths and the surface of the Eurasian and Amerasian basins (EB and AB). Observations show that from 1970 to 2017, the stratification in the AB has strengthened, whereas, in parts of the EB, the stratification has weakened. The strengthening in the AB is linked to freshening and deepening of the halocline. In the EB, the weakened stratification is associated with salinification and shoaling of the halocline (Atlantification). Simulations from a suite of CMIP6 models project that, under a strong greenhouse-gas forcing scenario (ssp585), the overall surface freshening and warming continue in both basins, but there is a divergence in hydrographic trends in certain regions. Within the AB, there is agreement among the models that the upper layers will become more stratified. However, within the EB, models diverge regarding future stratification. This is due to different balances between trends at the surface and trends at depth, related to Fram Strait fluxes. The divergence affects projections of future state of Arctic sea ice, as models with the strongest Atlantification project the strongest decline in sea ice volume in the EB. From these simulations, one could conclude that Atlantificaton will not spread eastward into the AB; however, we need to improve models to simulate tendencies in a more delicately stratified EB correctly."
6331	Hypothetical	"Tea sector is a major contributor to Kenya’s economy through foreign exchange via export. However, extensive amount of energy is required to produce one kilogram of tea, making tea processing energy-intensive. Comparing greenhouse gas emissions from different types of energy consumed in tea factories is imperative to enable policymakers make informed intervention in emission reduction. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions in tea factories is one of the pathways to meeting Kenya’s nationally determined 32% reduction of carbon emissions by 2030 and commitment to the Paris Agreement. This paper assesses greenhouse gas emissions from different sources of energy used in four tea factories in Kenya. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change emission factor is used to calculate the total emissions of each type of energy used for 5 years. Life cycle assessment using simapro software is used to assess the specific compound causing the emission. The findings reveal that the 5-year greenhouse gas emissions by biogas, solar, wood, briquettes, and electricity are 336,111, 7,108, 20,201.06, and 1,338.28 kg CO2/kWh, respectively. Firewood has the highest concentration of carbon dioxide, while solar energy has the least. Analysis of variance confirms significant difference (0.05>p=0.0272) in greenhouse gas emissions from the different energy sources. Post-hoc analyses shows a significant difference in emissions between solar and firewood (p<0.0125) and no significant difference between other sources of energy. Sustainability in the tea sector can be achieved through switching to macadamia briquettes as a source of thermal energy and a combination of electricity and solar for electrical energy."
5997	Evidential	"Deciphering the dominant controls on interconnections between groundwater, surface water, and climate is critical to understanding water cycles in arid environments, yet persistent uncertainties in the fundamental hydrology of these systems remain. The growing demand for critical minerals such as lithium and associated water demands in these arid environments has amplified the urgency to address these uncertainties. We present an integrated hydrological analysis of the Dry Andes region utilizing a uniquely comprehensive set of tracer data (3H, 18O/2H) for this type of environment, paired directly with physical hydrological observations. We find two strongly decoupled hydrological systems that interact only under specific hydrogeological conditions where preferential conduits have developed. The primary conditions in these conduits form are when laterally extensive fine-grained evaporite and/or lacustrine units or perennial flowing streams exist in connection with groundwater discharge sites. These conduits which efficiently capture and transport modern or “contemporary” water (weeks to years old) within the system control the interplay between modern hydroclimate variations and groundwater aquifers. Modern waters account for a small portion of basin budgets but are critical to sustaining surface waters due to the existence of these conduits. As a result, surface waters near basin floors are disproportionally sensitive to short-term climate and anthropogenic perturbations. This framework describes a new understanding of the dominant controls on natural water cycles intrinsic to these arid high-elevation systems which improves our ability to manage critical water resources."
7805	Hypothetical	"Agricultural productivity in low-income countries (LICs) is highly vulnerable to climate change, a challenge further compounded by the lack of reliable agricultural data. Existing models often assume the availability of comprehensive datasets, an assumption that does not hold true for LICs. This paper introduces a set of innovative frameworks designed to overcome data scarcity by integrating sparse agricultural data, high-resolution climate information, and advanced machine learning techniques. At the core of this approach is a Bayesian hierarchical model that combines satellite-derived climate data with incomplete in-situ agricultural data, enabling probabilistic estimates of productivity in data-limited contexts. The paper also presents a dynamic panel data model to explore long-term interactions between climate and agriculture, capturing sectoral dynamics over extended periods. Additionally, a novel framework for real-time assessment of agricultural productivity loss is introduced, leveraging Bayesian inference to estimate losses based on environmental proxies. These models are intended to improve predictive accuracy and provide practical tools for real-time monitoring and long-term analysis in data-constrained settings, contributing to stronger climate resilience and more informed decision-making in LICs."
4618	Evidential	"Hydro-morphological processes (HMP, any natural phenomenon contained within the spectrum defined between debris flows and flash floods) pose a relevant threat to infrastructure, urban and rural settlements and to lives in general. This has been widely observed in recent years and will likely become worse as climate change will influence the spatio-temporal pattern of precipitation events. The modelling of where HMP-driven hazards may occur can help define the appropriate course of actions before and during a crisis, reducing the potential losses that HMPs cause in their wake. However, the probabilistic information on locations prone to experience a given hazard is not sufficient to depict the risk our society may incur. To cover this aspect, modeling the loss information could open up to better territorial management strategies.  In this work, we made use of the HMP catalogue of China. This catalogue reports reliable records from 1985 to 2015 across the whole Chinese territory. Specifically, we implemented the Light Gradient Boosting (LGB) classifier to model the impact level that locations across China have suffered from HMPs over the thirty-year record. In doing so, we estimated spatial probabilities of certain HMP impact, something that has yet to be tested in the natural hazard community, especially over such a large spatio-temporal domain.  This experiment follows a project launched by the Chinese government with the aim of improving national efforts against climate change and improving societal resilience to disastrous events. In this context, the good predictive performance our model produced suggest that the cartographic output could be useful to inform authorities of locations prone to human and infrastructural losses of specific magnitudes."
2767	Evidential	"Tidal marshes are not only lost to human disturbance but also face the threat of sea level rise (SLR). However, current earth system models used to estimate future changes in wetland extent omit wetland‚Äôs real responses to SLR without field observations. We synthesised global data on sediment accretion rate (SAR) and surface elevation change (SEC) for tidal marshes and developed a mathematical model to assess their resilience to future SLR. Sediment loadings and precipitation largely explain the variance of marsh SAR and SEC. Human disturbance resulted in less sediment accretion and existing conservation activities were inefficient in promoting sediment accretion. Under the representative concentration pathways and nature-based human adaptation scenarios, tidal marshes will gain up to 63% of the current area by 2100 if sufficient sediment loadings and accommodation space allow landward migration. If current accommodation space maintains, net areal losses of > 30% are possible and hotspots of future marsh loss are largely in North America, Australia and China. Projections for most SLR scenarios see marsh area peaking in the mid rather than late 21st century. This implicates that tidal marshes may contribute to achieve a climate neutral world by 2050. We highlight the importance of nature- based adaptation in enhancing the resilience of tidal marshes to future SLR."
6468	Hypothetical	"While it is difficult, if not impossible, for most humans to conceptualize CO2 levels or ocean temperatures, we are very aware of the growing number of storms and their increase in severity. Indeed, according to the National Weather Service, the number of severe storms has increased in the United States from 1 – 3/decade in the 1950s through the 1980s, to 8/decade in the 1990s, 30/decade in the 2000s, and 54/decade in the 2010s. Here we argue that a Severe Storm Index (SSI), calculated by dividing the sum of storms/decade by 10, is readily intelligible and can be used as a gauge to inform our behavior as we seek to correct climate change in the United States via a large-scale, fully integrated, “war-time like” effort."
3139	Definitive	"Conceptual and theoretical models for landscape evolution suggest that fluvial topography is sensitive to climate. However, it remains challenging to demonstrate a compelling link between fluvial topography and climate in natural landscapes. One possible reason is that many studies compare erosion rates to climate data, although theoretical studies show that, at steady state, climate is encoded in the relationship between erosion rate and topography rather than erosion rate alone. We use an existing global compilation of 10Be basin-averaged erosion rates to isolate the climate signal in topography as a function of erosion rate for morphologically steady-state, fluvially dominated basins underlain by crystalline bedrock. Our results show that the relationship between erosion rate (a proxy for rock uplift rate) and the normalized river channel steepness index (a proxy for fluvial relief) becomes increasingly nonlinear with increasing mean annual precipitation and decreasing aridity. This result indicates that erosional efficiency increases in wetter and more humid climates, lowering fluvial relief for a given erosion rate. When interpreted in the context of detachment-limited bedrock incision models that account for incision thresholds and stochastic flood distributions, this systematic pattern can be explained by a decrease in discharge variability in wetter and more humid landscapes, assuming incision thresholds are important on a global scale."
8198	Definitive	"Submesoscale dynamics, operating at spatial scales of O(1‚àí10 km) and temporal scales of O(1 day), are particularly important for marine ecosystems as they occur on similar timescales as phytoplankton growth, enabling biophysical feedbacks. While submesoscale dynamics are known to impact biological fluxes by modifying nutrient upwelling, horizontal transport has traditionally been assumed to only redistribute phytoplankton without altering concentrations. However, variations in submesoscale dispersion may significantly impact total biogeochemical flux if biological reactions occur during dispersal. By parameterizing the effects of dispersion due to lateral stirring on flux, within an eastern boundary current region, we show that enhanced dispersion yields a near-linear increase in offshore flux, with the magnitude modulated by phytoplankton growth rates and ambient nutrient availability. These findings identify a pathway for improving parameterizations of biogeochemical fluxes, while revealing a source of uncertainty in their prediction by climate models."
6777	Evidential	"Utilizing imaging spectroscopy technology to identify methane super-emitters plays a vital role in mitigating methane emissions in the Oil & Gas (O&G) sector. While earlier research has uncovered significant point-source methane emissions from O&G production in the US and Canada, which are key regions with large methane emissions, a comprehensive post-COVID-19 survey has been notably absent. Here, we perform a detailed survey of methane super-emitters across multiple basins of North America (Marcellus Shale US, Haynesville/Bossier Shale US, Permian Delaware Tight US and Montney Play Canada) using the new Chinese Gaofen5-01A/02 (GF5-01A/02) satellite measurements during 2022-2023. We detect 48 extreme methane point-source emissions with flux rates of 646 to 16071 kg h_1. These emissions exhibit a highly skewed and heavy-tailed distribution, constituting approximately 30% of the total flux in sample region, with a range of 13% to 63%. Moreover, we observe a 66.7% reduction in methane emissions in Permian Delaware Tight region during COVID-19, followed by fluctuations until spring 2022. By summer 2023, methane emissions rebound to previous magnitude (0.66 ± 0.20 Tg a_1). Using these point-source surveys, we further quantify a regional methane emission of 1.08±0.02 Tg a-1 in Delaware subbasin. This estimation closely aligns with top-down inversions (0.86±0.03 Tg a-1) from TROPOMI. The upscale estimation underscores the effectiveness of high-resolution remote sensing measurements in improving bottom-up emissions inventories and refining regional methane emission assessments. Our results highlight the potential climate benefits derived from regular monitoring and specific remediation efforts focused on relatively few strong point-source emissions."
6745	Evidential	"Increasing fuel aridity due to climate warming has and will continue to increase wildfire danger in California. In addition to reducing global greenhouse gas emissions, one of the primary proposals for counteracting this increase in wildfire danger is a widespread expansion of hazardous fuel reductions. Here, we quantify the potential for fuel reduction to reduce wildfire intensity using empirical relationships derived from historical observations using a novel combination of spatiotemporal resolution (0.5km, hourly) and extent (48 million acres, 9 years). We use machine learning to quantify relationships between sixteen environmental conditions (including ten fuel characteristics and four temperature-affected aridity characteristics) and satellite-observed fire radiative power. We use the derived relationships to create fire intensity potential (FIP) maps of sixty historical weather snapshots at a 2km and hourly resolution. We then place these weather snapshots in differing background climatological temperature and fuel characteristic conditions to quantify their independent and combined influence on FIP. We find that in order to offset the effect of climate warming under the SSP2-4.5 emissions scenario, fuel reduction would need to be maintained perpetually on ~3 million acres (at a 5-year return frequency, 600,000 acres, or ~1% of our domain, per year) by 2050 and ~8 million acres (at a 5-year return frequency, 1.6 million acres, or ~3% of our domain, per year) by 2090. Overall, we find substantial potential for fuel reduction to negate the effects of climate warming and that whether or not fuel reduction is scaled up has larger leverage on our domain average FIP than shifting global greenhouse gas emissions from the SSP2-4.5 to the SSP1-2.6 trajectory."
8164	Hypothetical	"Time series analysis developed in the previous report [1] for UK mean summer temperature has been applied to further examples of weather trends, including temperature, rainfall and Sahara dust, and so at global, regional, national and local levels, in an attempt to assess whether wind power is having a deleterious effect on weather patterns. The analysis involves detrending weather data by calculating first differences and then computing the cross-correlation function, or CCF with wind power capacity. The calculations are benchmarked using atmospheric CO2 concentration. The consistency of a significant correlation is tested by detrending using linear residuals and then calculating the CCF on the basis of the residuals, corrected for autocorrelation using the Cochrane-Orcutt procedure [4]. In four cases, where the data were reliable, the analysis provided a clear distinction in favour of wind power as a putative cause of the weather trends, in preference to atmospheric CO2 concentration. Where the quality of the data was less reliable, the outcome was inconclusive. Nevertheless, it would seem that our efforts to mitigate anthropogenic global warning with wind power might well be having a deleterious effect on weather patterns"
8631	Exploratory	"During the Miocene Climatic Optimum (MCO; 17‚Äì15 Ma), the northern boundary of mangroves ‚Äì now situated at ~30¬∞ N ‚Äì extended along the northern Mediterranean coasts (~45¬∞ N). These Avicennia-only mangroves have been considered impoverished mangroves controlled by the general latitudinal temperature gradient. The MCO Mediterranean mangroves have been compared with the extant Middle East (ME) mangroves around the Arabian Peninsula, characterized by the dominance of Avicennia and their low diversity. However, these extant communities are not a latitudinal feature but rather an anomaly shaped by extreme environmental conditions (aridity, hypersalinity, sediment supply) that only a few mangrove species can tolerate. In contrast, reconstructed environments for MCO Mediterranean mangroves indicate mild, rainy climates. We conclude that current ME mangroves cannot be considered modern analogs for the MCO Mediterranean mangroves. Finding such modern analogs is challenging, and further studies are recommended to uncover their ecological and biogeographical patterns."
8734	Definitive	"Due to sizeable anthropogenic CO2 emissions, China’s transition towards carbon neutrality will fundamentally alter global CO2 emissions, providing critical insights into warming levels, extreme events, overshoot, tipping points, and regional climate impacts. Existing emission scenarios that fail to reflect this transition increasingly diverge from reality. To bridge this gap, we developed an interdisciplinary and multi-model framework that integrates up-to-date emissions inventory and emissions pathway to net zero CO2 by 2060 for China, and then constructed a reality-aligned, sector-specific combined scenario (SSP2-com) for greenhouse gases and air pollutants across global-to-regional, national-to-provincial, and multi-resolution-grid scales. Our emissions pathway sees that global CO_ will peak in concentration by 2062, and achieve net zero in emissions by 2072. The Asia-Pacific region, particularly China, will lead these reductions through contributions from the energy and industrial sectors. Climate emulators show global temperatures will initially follow SSP2-4.5 but later become more compatible with SSP1-2.6 trends, projected to peak around 2071 and reach a rise of 2.01°C by 2100 (~3.2 W m-2) or for the period 2091-2110, with temperatures falling below 2°C in the first decade after 2100, relevant to the Paris Agreement target. We further propose an evolving SSP2-com+ framework, integrating updated regional and national emission trajectories, to align with commitments more timely and enhance global cooperation. Our findings indicate that balanced, nationally-determined decarbonization efforts can stabilize warming around 2°C without requiring early unprecedented decarbonization rates or large-scale carbon removal efforts. These strategies align more closely with current emission status and national commitments than other existing scenarios, providing a more plausible basis for earth system models."
7608	Exploratory	"A changing climate and increasing human population necessitate understanding global freshwater availability. To enable assessment of lake water variability from local-to-global and monthly-to-decadal scales, we extended the Global Lake area, Climate, and Population (GLCP) dataset, which contains monthly lake surface area for 1.42 million lakes with paired basin-level climate and population data from 1995 through 2020. In comparison to the previous version of the GLCP, the extended version is monthly and includes information on lake ice cover as well as basin-level snow area, humidity, longwave and shortwave radiation, and cloud cover. The extended GLCP emphasizes FAIR data principles by expanding its scripting repository and maintaining unique HydroLAKES identifiers, which enables the GLCP to be joined with other HydroLAKES-derived products. Compared to the original version, the extended GLCP contains a richer suite of variables that enable disparate analyses of lake water trends at broad spatial and temporal scales."
2864	Definitive	"Climate change has driven an increase in the frequency and severity of fires in Eurasian boreal forests. A growing number of field studies have linked the change in fire regime to post-fire recruitment failure and permanent forest loss. In this study we used four burnt area and two forest loss datasets to calculate the landscape-scale fire return interval (FRI) and associated risk of permanent forest loss. We then used machine learning to predict how the FRI will change under a high emissions scenario (SSP3-7.0) by the end of the century. We found that there is currently 133 000 km2 at high, or extreme, risk of fire-induced forest loss, with a further 3 M km2 at risk by the end of the century. This has the potential to degrade or destroy some of the largest remaining intact forests in the world, negatively impact the health and economic wellbeing of people living in the region, as well as accelerate global climate change."
2662	Definitive	"The history of sea level across the Quaternary is essential for assessing past and future climate. Global sea-level reconstructions are typically derived from oxygen isotope curves, but require calibration with geological constraints that are scarce prior to the last glacial cycle (>130 thousand years ago). Here we show that the coral reef terrace sequence at the Huon Peninsula (Papua New Guinea) provides such constraints up to ~420 thousand years ago, through a geometric analysis of high-resolution topographic data. We derive a northward tectonic tilt as regional deformation pattern, and estimate relative sea level for 31 Quaternary periods, including several periods for which no relative sea level data exists elsewhere. Supported by numerical reef models, these estimates suggest that oxygen isotope-based global mean sea-level curves systematically underestimate interstadial sea-level elevations, by up to ~20m. Compared to those curves, our results imply a stronger degree of non-linearity between ice-sheet volumes and global temperatures within Quaternary glacial cycles."
3228	Evidential	"Lithium isotopes have emerged as a powerful tool to probe the response of global weathering to changes in climate. Due to the preferential incorporation of 6Li into clay minerals during chemical weathering, the isotope ratio Œ¥7Li may be used to interrogate the balance of primary mineral dissolution and clay precipitation. This balance has been linked to relative rates of chemical and physical denudation, such that dissolved Œ¥7Li (Œ¥7Lidiss) is highest at moderate weathering intensities when chemical and physical denudation are comparable. However, we argue that current theory linking Œ¥7Li to weathering regimes through fluid travel times are unable to explain observations of low Œ¥7Li and high Li concentrations in rapidly eroding settings. In this study, we re-examine the relationships between Œ¥7Li, Li concentration, and weathering regime by incorporating Li isotopes into simulations of weathering profiles using a reactive transport model (CrunchFlow) that includes advective fluxes of regolith to simulate variable erosion rates in response to uplift. In these simulations, fractionation is implemented through a kinetic fractionation factor during clay precipitation, which allows the Œ¥7Li of dissolved and suspended loads in the model to vary as a function of Li/Al ratios in primary and secondary minerals. When the model is run over a range of infiltration and erosion rates, simulations reproduce observed global patterns of Œ¥7Lidiss and suspended load Œ¥7Li as a function of weathering intensity, controlled primarily by water travel times and mineral residence times in weathered bedrock. We find that reduced water travel times at low weathering intensity, however, are inconsistent with observations of high Li concentrations. As an alternative, we demonstrate how the rapid weathering of soluble, Li-rich minerals such as chlorite under low weathering intensities may resolve this apparent discrepancy between data and theory. We also suggest that observed patterns are consistent with geothermal Li sources under low weathering intensities. This work offers a foundation guiding future studies in testing potential mechanisms underlying global riverine Œ¥7Lidiss."